<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [

    <!ENTITY Gtilde  CDATA "G&#x0303;"  --       8 -->
    <!ENTITY acute   CDATA "&#x00B4;"   --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY apos    CDATA "&#x2019;"   --      69 -->
    <!ENTITY circ    CDATA "&#x02C6;"   --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY grave   CDATA "`"          --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY gtilde  CDATA "g&#x0303;"  --     463 -->
    <!ENTITY ldquo   CDATA "&#x201C;"   --     330 -->
    <!ENTITY lpar    CDATA "("          --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY lsquo   CDATA "&#x2018;"   --       1 -->
    <!ENTITY mdash   CDATA "&#x2014;"   --     553 -->
    <!ENTITY nbsp    CDATA "&#x00A0;"   --       2 -->
    <!ENTITY ndash   CDATA "&#x2013;"   --       1 -->
    <!ENTITY rdquo   CDATA "&#x201D;"   --     331 -->
    <!ENTITY rpar    CDATA ")"          --       5 -->

]>
<TEI.2 lang=en>
<teiHeader>
<fileDesc>
<titleStmt>
<title nfc=2>A Bisayan Grammar and Notes on Bisayan Rhetoric and Poetics and Filipino Dialectology</title>
<author key="Romuáldez, Norberto" ref="https://viaf.org/viaf/280909527/">Norberto Romuáldez y López (1875&ndash;1941)</author>
<respStmt><resp>Transcription</resp> <name key="Hellingman, Jeroen">Jeroen Hellingman</name></respStmt>
</titleStmt>
<publicationStmt>
<publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
<pubPlace>Urbana, Illinois, USA.</pubPlace>
<idno type=PGclearance>gbn0306172138</idno>
<idno type=PGDPProjectId>projectID407c4fe1925fe</idno>
<idno type=PGSrc>69603-Romualdez-A-Bisayan-Grammar</idno>
<idno type=epub-id>urn:uuid:73239ae3-d4ba-41fd-9cca-2e3a4f59222c</idno>
<idno type=PGnum>69603</idno>
<date>2022-12-22</date>
<availability>
<p>&availability.en;

<p>This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at <xref url="https://www.pgdp.net/">www.pgdp.net</xref>.

<p>Waray-waray is one of several languages called Visayan or Bisayan, and is spoken in the eastern part of the Visayas region of the Philippines, that is, the islands of Leyte and Samar, by, currently, about 2 to 3 million speakers. This book is a grammar of the language by the (locally) well-known literator Norberto Romuáldez. This book is quite scarce, and was apparently printed using rather primitive equipment on cheap paper in the Philippines.

<p>The author followed the Spanish-based orthography of Waray-waray (back in 1908, when the Philippines had been American territory for a decade), but was quite aware of spelling-issues, as shown in this work.

<p>Scans for this book are available from the Internet Archive (copy 
<xref url="https://archive.org/details/bisayangrammarno00romurich/page/n3/mode/2up">1</xref>).

<!-- gbn0306172138: Norberto Romualdez, Bisayan Grammar (English, Waray-Waray). Jeroen Hellingman &lt;jeroen@bohol.ph&gt;. 1908c. 6/18/2003. ok. -->

</availability>
</publicationStmt>
<notesStmt>
    <note type="Description">Waray-waray is one of several languages called Visayan or Bisayan, and is spoken in the eastern part of the Visayas region of the Philippines, that is, the islands of Leyte and Samar, by, currently, about 2 to 3 million speakers. This book is a grammar of the language by the (locally) well-known literator Norberto Romuáldez.</note>
</notesStmt>
<sourceDesc>
<bibl>
<author>Norberto Romuáldez</author>
<title>A Bisayan Grammar and Notes on Bisayan Rhetoric and Poetics and Filipino Dialectology</title>
<date>1908</date>
</bibl>
</sourceDesc>
</fileDesc>
<encodingDesc>
    <p></p>
    <tagsDecl lang=xx>
        <rendition selector=".large">font-size: large;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".small">font-size: small;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".xs">font-size: x-small;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".center">text-align: center;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".example">text-align: center;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".right">text-align: right;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=".vam">vertical-align: middle;</rendition>
        <rendition selector="h3, h4, h5, h6, .h3, .h4, .h5, .h6">text-align: center;</rendition>
        <rendition selector="h5">font-weight: bold;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=.nowrap>white-space: nowrap;</rendition>

        <!--
        <rendition selector="td">background-color: yellow; border: 1pt dotted red;</rendition>
        <rendition selector="li">background-color: lightblue;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=":lang(war)">color: red;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=":lang(es)">color: yellow;</rendition>
        <rendition selector=":lang(en)">color: black;</rendition>
        -->
    </tagsDecl>
</encodingDesc>
<profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
        <language id=en>English</language>
        <language id=en-US>English (United States)</language>
        <language id=en-UK>English (United Kingdom)</language>
        <language id=de>German</language>
        <language id=fr>French</language>
        <language id=es>Spanish</language>
        <language id=la>Latin</language>
        <language id=tl>Tagalog</language>
        <language id=war>Waray</language>
        <language id=xx>No linguistic content</language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
        <keywords>
            <list>
                <item>Waray language -- Grammar</item>
            </list>
        </keywords>
    </textClass>
</profileDesc>
<revisionDesc>
    <list>
        <item>2005-03-05 Started.
    </list>
</revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text rend="stylesheet(style/classic.css)">
<front id=frontmatter>
<div1 id=cover type=Cover>


<p><figure id=cover-image rend="image(images/new-cover.jpg)">
<figDesc>Newly Designed Front Cover.</figDesc>
</figure>



<div1 id=titlepage type=TitlePage>


<p><figure id=titlepage-image rend="image(images/titlepage.png)">
<figDesc>Original Title Page.</figDesc>
</figure>



<titlePage>
<docTitle>
<titlePart>A Bisayan Grammar</titlePart>
<titlePart type=sub>and
<lb>Notes on
<lb>Bisayan Rhetoric and Poetics
<lb>and
<lb>Filipino Dialectology</titlePart>
</docTitle>

<byline>By

<lb><docAuthor>Norberto Romuáldez, <abbr expan="Bachelor of Arts">B.A.</abbr></docAuthor>

<lb><hi rend=small>&mdash;Provincial Fiscal of Leyte, <abbr expan="Philippine Islands">P.I.</abbr>&mdash;
<lb>&mdash;Attorney-at-Law&mdash;
<lb>&mdash;Formerly Director of &ldquo;San Jose&rdquo; College of Takloban&mdash;
<lb>&mdash;Professor of Latin&mdash;</hi>
</byline>


<epigraph><lg type=Group rend="font(italic)">
                <l rend="indent(6)">O! good my lord, no Latin;
    <l>I am not such a truant since my coming
    <l>As not to know the language I have liv&apos;d in
    </lg>

                <p rend="align(right)"><hi>SHAKESPEARE</hi> <!-- King Henry VIII, Act III, scene I -->
</epigraph>


<docImprint>
<docDate>1908.</docDate>

<lb>&ldquo;PAG PAHAYAG&rdquo; CO.&mdash;TAKLOBAN.
</docImprint>
</titlePage>





<pb id=pb.a>
<div1 id=copyright type=Copyright>


<p rend="center small"><hi rend=sc>Copyright</hi> 1908
<lb><hi rend=sc>By</hi> <hi rend=ac>Norberto Romuáldez</hi>

<p rend="center small">All Rights of Publication and Translation Reserved.




<pb id=pb.b>
<div1 type=Dedication id=dedic rend="toc-head(DEDICATION)">


<p rend=center><hi>TO THE
<lb><hi rend=large>TO THE YOUTH OF SAMAR AND LEYTE</hi>
<lb>who are clearly demonstrating aspirations
<lb>for a brighter future thru education
<lb>this book is dedicated,
<lb>in the hope that it may give a stimulus to their work
<lb>and an incentive to appreciate what is best in their language
<lb>as well as in the hope that, at a future day,
<lb>some one of them may be fitted to do this work
<lb>better than here presented.</hi>

    <p rend=right><hi><hi rend=sc>The Author</hi></hi>



<pb id=pb.iii n=III>
<div1 id=intro type=Introduction>
<head>INTRODUCTION</head>


<p>The publication of a Bisayan grammar has been eagerly awaited by many. It has been desired by those who are interested simply in the study of a native dialect. It has been needed by all Americans who desire an acquaintance with the language of the people among whom they live in order that they may get into closer touch with the great mass of natives as yet unable to speak either Spanish or English. It has been requested by many natives who wish to improve their use of their mother tongue. To all such, the present volume will prove of great value.

<p>The author is recognized throughout Samar and Leyte as one of the highest authorities on the Samareño dialect. His statements may therefore be accepted as authoritative. His treatment of prefixes and suffixes, of similar words with different meanings, and of the various forms of the verb are especially interesting and valuable.

<p>It is hoped that Mr. Norberto Romuáldez may be able to carry out his intention of putting out a combined grammar and language book designed especially for those just beginning the study of Bisayan. Such a work in conjunction with the present grammar would immensly facilitate the acquisition of a speaking knowledge of the dialect.

<p rend=signed>W. W. MARQUARDT,
<lb><hi rend=small>Division Superintendent of Schools.</hi>



<pb id=pb.v n=V>
<div1 id=preface type=Preface>
<head>PREFATORY REMARKS</head>


<p>This book is not intended to be a complete grammar, but is only an elementary work containing a collection of some principles governing the formation of the words and the construction of the sentences of the Bisayan<note n=A>We write <hi>B</hi>isayan, and not <hi>V</hi>isayan for the reason, among others, that there is no <hi>V</hi> or sound of <hi>V</hi> in our dialect, and that there seems to be no necessity for changing in English the <hi>B</hi> of the original <hi>Bisayâ</hi> into <hi>V</hi>.</note> dialect spoken on the islands of Samar and nearly half of Leyte, by about four hundred thousand people.

<p>At random and at odd intervals as the author&apos;s time permitted, he arranged, more or less in a logical grammatical order, the material gathered. Bearing in mind that there has never been any previous treatise on this subject worthy the name, the whole field therefore remaining practically unexplored, it will not be surprising that the use of spare moments covering only a short period has left much of the field undeveloped. However, what has been collected in this book will be found to be of primary importance to any one desiring to gain a quick acquaintance with the dialect for immediate practical use. After a careful study of the many examples under the different rules, coupled with a continuous practice, the user will be surprised&mdash;if he is a stranger&mdash;at the ease with which he acquires an Asiatic dialect, and&mdash;if he is a Filipino&mdash;how clear and logical is one of the most spoken dialects in his Mother-land.

<p>The author had no intention of launching this work at the present time; but it is done at the behest of his American friends who have urged him to issue what has been collected, a portion only of what is intended ultimately to be a complete treatise and grammar of Bisayan, in order that this material may be available for the use of persons <pb id=pb.vi n=VI>taking an interest in the Islands, thereby bringing about a common means of communication, which promotes a better feeling between the people born here and the newcomer.

<p>The exposition of the different subjects is not in the modern didactic form generally used in this class of works. This is simply due to the lack of sufficient time. Thus the grammar is divided into the usual parts: orthography, prosody, etimology, and syntax. Some of these parts have been treated to a very limited extent, because time has not admitted of the collection of sufficient material and of the opportunity to weigh the relative values and eliminate the exceptions from the rules.

<p>An appendix has been added where two topics are treated: notes on Rhetoric and Poetics of Bisayan, and notes on Filipino Dialectology consisting in a short comparative study of this dialect in reference to Tagalog, one of its sister-dialects in the Archipelago. The first notes are designed to complete the knowledge of Bisayan after the grammar is mastered; the second are intended to show the possibility of the formation of a common Filipino language<note n=A>A commitee has been found lately in Manila for this purpose.</note> out of the different dialects scattered thru out the Archipelago, in a similar way as the Modern High German has been formed out of the main primitive groups Frisian and Saxon. Frankish, Hessian, and Thuringian, and Alemannian and Bavarian.

<p>We have to repeat that our work is far from being perfect, even complete, on account of lack of sufficient time. Owing to the same circumstance, many errors in printing have crept into this book, which we have tried to correct at the end under the heading <hi>Errata</hi>. But we sincerely admit that not all of the mistakes that may be found in this book are to be assigned to lack of time. Like any other product of human industry, this work bears marks of errors arising from the two sources pointed out by Horace

<lg lang=la>
                <l rend="indent(4)">quas aut incuria fudit,
    <l>Vut humana parum cavit natura.
</lg>

<pb id=pb.vii n=VII><p>Acknowledgement is hereby made for the help rendered by Messrs. W. W. Marquardt, Div. Superintendent of Schools of Leyte, P.I., Fred Shoemaker, and H. W. Halbourg, in correcting part of the proof, and for the collaboration of Mr. Henry E. Neibert, Former American Teacher of Jaro, Leyte, P.I. whose knowledge of both tongues, English and Bisayan, added much material to the work.

<p>Hoping that this little volume may be of interest and real help, it is offered to an indulgent public for what it is worth.

<p rend=signed><hi>Norberto Romualdez</hi>

<p rend=dateline>Takloban, Province of Leyte,
<lb>Philippine Islands.
<lb>November 8, 1908.






<pb id=pb.ix n=IX>
<div1 id=toc type=Contents>
<head>CONTENTS</head>


<list type=tocList>
<item>                                              <ab type=tocPageNum rend=xs>PAGE</ab>

<item><ref target=dedic>DEDICATION</ref>            <ab type=tocPageNum>I</ab>
<item><ref target=intro>INTRODUCTION</ref>          <ab type=tocPageNum>III</ab>
<item><ref target=preface>PREFATORY REMARKS</ref>   <ab type=tocPageNum>IV</ab>
<item><ref target=toc>CONTENTS</ref>                <ab type=tocPageNum>IX</ab>

<item><hi><ref target=pt1>ORTHOGRAPHY AND PROSODY</ref></hi>

<list type=tocList>
    <item><ref target=ch1.1>LETTERS</ref>                                       <ab type=tocPageNum>1</ab>
    <item><ref target=ch1.2>THE ACCENTS</ref>                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>2</ab>
    <item><ref target=ch1.3>PUNCTUATION</ref>                                   <ab type=tocPageNum>3</ab>
    <item><ref target=ch1.4>VOWELS</ref>                                        <ab type=tocPageNum>5</ab>
    <item><ref target=ch1.5>SYLLABLES</ref>                                     <ab type=tocPageNum>5</ab>
    <item><ref target=ch1.6>CAPITALIZATION</ref>                                <ab type=tocPageNum>5</ab>
    <item><corr sic=CONTRCTIONS><ref target=ch1.7>CONTRACTIONS</ref></corr>     <ab type=tocPageNum>7</ab>
</list>

<item><hi><ref target=pt2>ETYMOLOGY</ref></hi>

<list type=tocList>
    <item><ref target=ch2.1>PARTS OF SPEECH</ref>                               <ab type=tocPageNum>6</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch2.1.1>Articles</ref></hi>                              <ab type=tocPageNum>7</ab>
            <list type=tocList>
            <item><ref target=ch2.1.1.1>Declension</ref>                        <ab type=tocPageNum>8</ab>
            </list>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch2.1.2>Nouns</ref></hi>                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>9</ab>
            <list type=tocList>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.1>Diminutive</ref>                    <ab type=tocPageNum>10</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.2>Figurative</ref>                    <ab type=tocPageNum>12</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.3>Verbal</ref>                        <ab type=tocPageNum>13</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.4>Compound</ref>                      <ab type=tocPageNum>22</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.5>Derivative</ref>                    <ab type=tocPageNum>23</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.6>Proper and Common</ref>             <ab type=tocPageNum>29</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.7>Positive, Comparative, and Superlative</ref>    <ab type=tocPageNum>32</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.8>Cardinal, Ordinal, Partitive, and Distributive</ref>    <ab type=tocPageNum>35</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.9>Collective</ref>                    <ab type=tocPageNum>38</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.10>Gender</ref>                        <ab type=tocPageNum>40</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.11>Number</ref>                        <ab type=tocPageNum>40</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.12>Case</ref>                          <ab type=tocPageNum>41</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.13>Important Observation</ref>         <ab type=tocPageNum>41</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.2.14>Transposition of Accents</ref>      <ab type=tocPageNum>43</ab>
            </list>
        <item><hi rend=sc><corr sic=Pronoun><ref target=ch2.1.3>Pronouns</ref></corr></hi>                               <ab type=tocPageNum>47</ab>
            <list type=tocList>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.3.1>Personal</ref>                      <ab type=tocPageNum>47</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.3.2>Demonstrative</ref>                 <ab type=tocPageNum>48</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.3.3>Possessive</ref>                    <ab type=tocPageNum>50</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.3.4>Relative</ref>                      <ab type=tocPageNum>52</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.3.5>Contractions</ref>                  <ab type=tocPageNum>56</ab>
            </list>
        <item><hi rend=sc><corr sic=Verb><ref target=ch2.1.4>Verbs</ref></corr></hi>                                  <ab type=tocPageNum>57</ab>
            <list type=tocList>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.1>Conjugation&mdash;Voices</ref>      <ab type=tocPageNum>58</ab>
                    <list type=tocList>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.1.1>Moods and Tenses</ref>      <ab type=tocPageNum>58</ab>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.1.2>Number and Person</ref>     <ab type=tocPageNum>61</ab>
                    </list>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.2>Inflections</ref>                   <ab type=tocPageNum>61</ab>
                    <list type=tocList>
                        <item>Table 1.&mdash;<ref target=tb61.1>Primitive Active</ref>                           <ab type=tocPageNum>61</ab>
                        <item>Table 2.&mdash;<ref target=tb64.6>Progressive Active</ref>                         <ab type=tocPageNum>61</ab>
                        <item>Table 3.&mdash;<ref target=tb68.1>Primitive Direct Passive</ref>                   <ab type=tocPageNum>68</ab>
                        <pb id=pb.x n=X><item>Table 4.&mdash;<ref target=tb70.4>Progressive Direct Passive</ref> <ab type=tocPageNum>70</ab>
                        <item>Table 5.&mdash;<ref target=tb73.1>Primitive Indirect Passive</ref>                 <ab type=tocPageNum>73</ab>
                        <item>Table 6.&mdash;<ref target=tb75.1>Progressive Indirect Passive</ref>               <ab type=tocPageNum>75</ab>
                        <item>Table 7.&mdash;<ref target=tb76.4>Primitive Instrumental Passive</ref>             <ab type=tocPageNum>76</ab>
                        <item>Table 8.&mdash;<ref target=tb78.4>Progressive Instrumental Passive</ref>           <ab type=tocPageNum>78</ab>
                    </list>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.3>Negative Forms</ref>                <ab type=tocPageNum>80</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.4>Interrogative Forms</ref>           <ab type=tocPageNum>82</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.5>Suppletory Verbs</ref>              <ab type=tocPageNum>84</ab>
                    <list type=tocList>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.5.1>Pronominal Form</ref>       <ab type=tocPageNum>84</ab>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.5.2>Adverbial Form</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>84</ab>
                    </list>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.6>Observation</ref>                   <ab type=tocPageNum>87</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.7>Impersonal Verbs</ref>              <ab type=tocPageNum>88</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.8>Defective Verbs</ref>               <ab type=tocPageNum>88</ab>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.9>Other classes of Verbs</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>89</ab>
                    <list type=tocList>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.9.1>Active Voice</ref>          <ab type=tocPageNum>90</ab>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.9.2>Direct Passive</ref>        <ab type=tocPageNum>93</ab>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.9.3>Indirect Passive</ref>      <ab type=tocPageNum>96</ab>
                        <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.9.4>Instrumental Passive</ref>  <ab type=tocPageNum>96</ab>
                    </list>
                <item><ref target=ch2.1.4.10>Depreciative Verbs</ref>            <ab type=tocPageNum>96</ab>
            </list>
        <item><hi rend=sc><corr sic=Adverb><ref target=ch2.1.5>Adverbs</ref></corr></hi>                                <ab type=tocPageNum>97</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><corr sic=Preposition><ref target=ch2.1.6>Prepositions</ref></corr></hi>                           <ab type=tocPageNum>98</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><corr sic=Conjunction><ref target=ch2.1.7>Conjunctions</ref></corr></hi>                           <ab type=tocPageNum>98</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><corr sic=Interjection><ref target=ch2.1.8>Interjections</ref></corr></hi>                          <ab type=tocPageNum>99</ab>
    </list>
</list>

<item><hi><ref target=pt3>SYNTAX</ref></hi>

<list type=tocList>
    <item><list type=tocList>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.1>Subjective relation</ref></hi>                   <ab type=tocPageNum>100</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.2>Predicative relation</ref></hi>                  <ab type=tocPageNum>100</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.3>Attributive relation</ref></hi>                  <ab type=tocPageNum>100</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.4>Complementary relation</ref></hi>                <ab type=tocPageNum>101</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.5>Adverbial relation</ref></hi>                    <ab type=tocPageNum>102</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.6>Representative relation</ref></hi>               <ab type=tocPageNum>102</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.7>Connective relation</ref></hi>                   <ab type=tocPageNum>103</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.8>Absolute and independent constructions</ref></hi>    <ab type=tocPageNum>103</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.9><corr sic=Sintax>Syntax</corr> of verbs</ref></hi>   <ab type=tocPageNum>103</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.10>Arrangement of words</ref></hi>                  <ab type=tocPageNum>105</ab>
    </list>

    <item><ref target=ch3.11>VIOLATIONS OF GOOD USE</ref>                <ab type=tocPageNum>105</ab>
    <list type=tocList>
        <item><hi rend=sc><corr sic=Barbarism><ref target=ch3.11.1>Barbarisms</ref></corr></hi>                              <ab type=tocPageNum>105</ab>
        <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=ch3.11.2>Foreign words</ref></hi>                          <ab type=tocPageNum>105</ab>
        <item><hi><ref target=ch3.11.3>Foreign words <corr sic=innecessarily>unnecessarily</corr> used in Bisayan</ref></hi>  <ab type=tocPageNum>106</ab>
            <list type=tocList>
            <item><ref target=ch3.11.3.1>Spanish words</ref>                     <ab type=tocPageNum>106</ab>
            <item><ref target=ch3.11.3.2>Chinese words</ref>                     <ab type=tocPageNum>111</ab>
            <item><ref target=ch3.11.3.3>English words</ref>                     <ab type=tocPageNum>111</ab>
            </list>
        <item><hi><ref target=ch3.11.4>Foreign constructions</ref></hi>        <ab type=tocPageNum>112</ab>
        <item><hi><ref target=ch3.11.5>Foreign words necessarily used in Bisayan</ref></hi>    <ab type=tocPageNum>112</ab>
    </list>
</list>


<item><hi><ref target=appendix>APPENDIX</ref></hi>

<list type=tocList>
<item><ref target=app1>NOTES ON BISAYAN RHETORIC AND POETICS</ref>     <ab type=tocPageNum>117</ab>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=app1.1>Figures of Speech</ref></hi>                     <ab type=tocPageNum>117</ab>
    <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=app1.2>Prose</ref></hi>                                 <ab type=tocPageNum>121</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><hi><ref target=app1.2.1>Letters</ref></hi>                  <ab type=tocPageNum>121</ab>
        </list>
    <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=app1.3>Poetic forms</ref></hi>                          <ab type=tocPageNum>123</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><hi><ref target=app1.3.1>Versification</ref></hi>            <ab type=tocPageNum>123</ab>
        </list>
    <item><hi rend=sc><ref target=app1.4>Collection of some Bisayan songs</ref></hi>      <ab type=tocPageNum>124</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><hi><ref target=app1.4.1>Moral Poetry</ref></hi>             <ab type=tocPageNum>124</ab>
        <pb id=pb.XI n=XI><item><hi><ref target=app1.4.2>Philosophic Poetry</ref></hi> <ab type=tocPageNum>125</ab>
        <item><hi><ref target=app1.4.3>Love Poetry</ref></hi>              <ab type=tocPageNum>125</ab>
        <item><ref target=app1.4.4>Sundry</ref>                            <ab type=tocPageNum>126</ab>
        </list>
    </list>

<item><ref target=app2>NOTE ON FILIPINO DIALECTOLOGY</ref>             <ab type=tocPageNum>128</ab>
    <list type=tocList>
    <item><ref target=app2.1>Words exactly the same in Bisayan and in Tagalog</ref>  <ab type=tocPageNum>128</ab>
    <item><ref target=app2.2>Words with some dialectal differences</ref> <ab type=tocPageNum>130</ab>
        <list type=tocList>
        <item><ref target=app2.2.1>Differences in the vowels <hi>i, o</hi></ref>   <ab type=tocPageNum>130</ab>
        <item><ref target=app2.2.2>Differences <hi>k, h, l, r, d, t</hi></ref>     <ab type=tocPageNum>131</ab>
        <item><ref target=app2.2.3>Differences in the accent, and in the separation of the syllables</ref> <ab type=tocPageNum>132</ab>
        <item><ref target=app2.2.4>Transformation from <hi>a</hi> to <hi>o</hi> and viceversa</ref>    <ab type=tocPageNum>132</ab>
        </list>
    </list>

<item><ref target=errata>ERRATA</ref>                                    <ab type=tocPageNum>133</ab>
</list>
</list>





<pb id=pb1 n=1>
</front>
<body>
<div0 id=pt1 type=Part>
<head>ORTHOGRAPHY AND PROSODY</head>

<div1 id=ch1.1 type=Chapter>
<head>LETTERS.</head>

<p>The Bisayan letters are twenty:<note n=A><p>According to the nature of the Bisayan dialect and according to what some Filipino philologists have written, Rizal among them, referring to the dialects in the Philippines, the letters of the Bisayan language must be the following:

<p rend=center>a, b, d, e, g, &gtilde;, h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, r, s, t, u, y, w.

<p>As it can be noticed, the letters c, f, j, ñ, q, v, x and z are omitted from the preceding list, and &gtilde; and w are introduced. The reason for this is as follows:

<list>
    <item>c, in its sound as in <hi>city</hi><corr sic=. resp=errata>,</corr> can be substituted by the letter s; and, in its sound like c in <hi>cup</hi>, it can be substituted by k.
    <item>f is never used in Bisayan.
    <item>j, in its Spanish sound, can be substituted by h, which has an aspirate pronunciation in Bisayan in all cases. In Bisayan, there is no sound like that of the English j; however, in some places on the western and southern coasts of Leyte, the <hi>y</hi> is pronounced like the English <hi>j</hi>, as in <hi lang=war>maayo</hi> (pronounced mah-ah-joh) good.
    <item>The Spanish letter ñ, or a sound like it, can be written in Bisayan more properly with the combination of these two letters <hi>ny</hi>, as in <hi lang=war>minyo</hi> (pr. mean-yo) married.
    <item>q is not necessary, since the <hi>k</hi> can be used in all cases, where <hi>q</hi> is needed. The phrase <hi lang=war>quiquilàon co</hi> (I shall see it) can be perfectly written <hi lang=war>kikiláon ko</hi>.
    <item>v is never used in Bisayan.
    <item>x, in its Spanish sound, can be substituted by <hi>ks</hi>; and, in its English sounds, it can be substituted by <hi>gs</hi> or <hi>ks</hi>, respectively.
    <item>z, in either its English or its Spanish sound, is never used in Bisayan.
    <item>The <hi>&gtilde;</hi> is for the nasal sound that is very often used in Bisayan, like the ng in <hi>song, longing</hi>. The <hi>g</hi> is preferable to the combination <hi>n&gtilde;</hi>, which would sometimes lead to confusion; because this combination ng in Bisayan, is not pronounced as one letter, in many instances, but each of these letters is pronounced; as, for example, the word <hi lang=war>bu&gtilde;a</hi> (fruit), if written bunga, should sound <hi>booong-ghah,</hi> which means <hi>to dart</hi> or <hi>to be darted</hi>.
    <item>w is needed in all cases of sounds like Spanish dipthongs; but it must be used in Bisayan always as a consonant, never as a vowel.
</list>

<p>Notwithstanding the preceding considerations, the orthography used in this book is the old one, but simplified to a certain extent, on account of the fact that this alphabet (if it can be properly called an <hi>alphabet</hi>, it having no <hi>f</hi> or sound of <hi>f</hi>) is not yet used, even known, but by very few persons among the Bisayan speaking people.

<p>It would be very desirable for the people to adopt the new orthography proposed in this note, because it is evidently more simple and proper for the particular nature of the Bisayan dialect.

<pb n=2 id=pb2n><p>A study of <corr sic=this resp=errata>the</corr> method of reducing the number of Bisayan vowels is also to be desired, as it seems that not more than three are needed, to wit: <hi>a, e</hi> or <hi>i, o</hi> or <hi>u</hi>.

<p>The nature of the Bisayan tongue argues for such a simplicity. Dr. T.H. Pardo de Tavera, referring to the ancient Filipino alphabet, says: &ldquo;The alphabet was composed of seventeen letters, three of which were vowels. A consonant standing alone was always pronounced with an a sound following; by the use of a dot or dash near and above the consonant stem, in much the same fashion as is used in certain systems of shorthand, instead of the sound of the a, the sound of the vowels <hi>e</hi> or <hi>i</hi> was produced: when the dot or dash was placed below the consonant stem the vowel sound given was equivalent to <hi>o</hi> or <hi>u</hi>.&rdquo; (See Census of the Philippine Islands: 1903 Volume One, page 327).</note>


<table id=tb2n.1 rend="columns(3)">
    <row><cell>a,           <cell cols=2>as <hi>a</hi> in <hi>large</hi>
    <row><cell>b,           <cell rows=3>} <cell rows=3 rend=vam>as in English
    <row><cell>c,
    <row><cell>d,
    <row><cell>e,           <cell cols=2>as <hi>e</hi> in <hi>well</hi>
    <row><cell>g,           <cell cols=2>as <hi>g</hi> in <hi>good</hi>
    <row><cell>n&gtilde;,   <cell cols=2>as <hi>ng</hi> in <hi>long</hi>
    <row><cell>h,           <cell cols=2>as <hi>h</hi> in <hi>hat</hi>
    <row><cell>i,           <cell cols=2>sounding <hi>ee</hi>
    <row><cell>l,           <cell rows=3>} <cell rows=3 rend=vam>as in English
    <row><cell>m,
    <row><cell>n,
    <row><cell>o,           <cell cols=2>as <hi>o</hi> in <hi>long</hi>
    <row><cell>p,           <cell cols=2>as in English
    <row><cell>qu,          <cell cols=2>as the English <hi>k</hi>
    <row><cell>r,           <cell rows=3>} <cell rows=3 rend=vam>as in English
    <row><cell>s,
    <row><cell>t,
    <row><cell>u,           <cell cols=2>sounding <hi>oo</hi> as in <hi>good</hi>
    <row><cell>y,           <cell cols=2>as <hi>y</hi> in <hi>young</hi>
</table>


<pb id=pb2 n=2><p>After knowing the respective sounds of these letters, according to the preceding table, no rule is necessary for the pronunciation of Bisayan words.



<div1 id=ch1.2>
<head>THE ACCENTS.</head>

<p>The orthographical accent is an important sign in Bisayan, in order to give to the words their proper pronunciation, and, consequently, their proper meaning.

<p>Of the emission of the voice in pronouncing the Bisayan vowels, there are two ways: one is the ordinary way, like that of the English vowels, as in

<table id=tb2.1>
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>baga</hi>    <cell>(red-hot coal or wood),
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>dinhi</hi>   <cell>(here),
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>olo</hi>     <cell>(head),
</table>

<p rend=noindent>and the other is by a guttural suspended emission of the voice, like

<table id=tb2.2>
    <row><cell>the last <hi>a</hi> in <hi lang=war>bagà</hi>  <cell>(lungs),
    <row><cell>the last <hi>i</hi> in <hi lang=war>dirì</hi>  <cell>(not or no), and
    <row><cell>the last <hi>o</hi> in <hi lang=war>torò</hi>  <cell>(drop).
</table>

<p>This guttural pronunciation is only used in the endings of words.

<p>From the various combinations of these ways of pronouncing the vowels and the force with which they are pronounced, it follows that a vowel, no matter which one it is, has four different sounds:

<list>
    <item><ab type=itemNum>1st.</ab> As ordinarily, and without any particular force.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>2nd.</ab> As ordinarily, but with force in its pronunciation.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>3rd.</ab> By a guttural suspended emission of the voice, and without force.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>4th.</ab> By a guttural suspended emission of the voice, and with force.
</list>

<pb id=pb3 n=3><p>The first way does not need any orthographical sign. But the last three ones require a special orthographical accent in each ease.

<p>When a vowel is pronounced as ordinarily, but with more force than others in the same word, the proper accent is the acute (&acute;).

<p>When a vowel is pronounced with a suspended guttural sound, but without any force, the corresponding accent is the grave (&grave;).

<p>And when a vowel is pronounced with a suspended guttural sound with force, its accent is the circumflex (&circ;), which is simply the combination of the two foregoing accents, as this last represents a sound that is the combination of the two sounds, suspended guttural and with force.

<p>Therefore, in writing the word <hi lang=war>quita</hi>, for example, in its three different meanings and according to its three different pronunciations, it must be as follows:

<table id=tb3.1>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)">
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)">
<column><column>
<row>
    <cell><hi lang=war>quitá</hi> <cell>(we)
    <cell><hi lang=war>quità</hi> <cell>(see)
    <cell><hi lang=war>quitâ</hi> <cell>(look at).
</table>

<p>RULE. There are three different accents in Bisayan: the acute (&acute;); the grave (&grave;); and the angular, which we may call improperly circumflex (&circ;).

<p>The acute is located wherever it is needed, either at the beginning or in the middle or at the ending of the word. Examples:

<table id=tb3.2>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)">
<column><column>
<row>
    <cell><hi lang=war>úpa</hi> <cell>(reward)
    <cell><hi lang=war>upá</hi> <cell>(rice chaff).
</table>

<p>The grave and angular, by their nature, are only used upon words ending in a vowel, and then only upon the last vowel. Examples:

<table id=tb3.3>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)">
<column><column>
<row>
    <cell><hi lang=war>dacò</hi> <cell>(large),
    <cell><hi lang=war>dacô</hi> <cell>(larger)
</table>



<div1 id=ch1.3>
<head>PUNCTUATION.</head>

<p>The signs of punctuation in Bisayan are the same as those in English, the rules for the use of the period (.), colon (:), semicolon (;), comma (,), parenthesis (), dash (&mdash;), quotation marks (&ldquo;&nbsp;&nbsp;&rdquo;) and apostrophe (&apos;) being identical.

<pb id=pb4 n=4><p>But the rules are different for the use of the interrogation and exclamation points, and hyphen.

<p>In Bisayan, the Spanish way is followed in using two points of interrogation and two of exclamation, the one at the beginning of the question or exclamation (¿) (¡), and the other at the ending (?) (!).

<p>While the hyphen (-) is also used in Bisayan to connect parts of a word divided at the end of a line, and to connect two or more nouns, adjectives, or particles, so as to form them into a single compound, it has an additional use which is to separate distinctly the syllables of certain words that would have a different meaning or none at all without the said separation. Examples:

<table id=tb4.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)">
    <column><column>

    <row><cell><hi lang=war>sál-ong</hi>     <cell>(to hook)               <cell><hi lang=war>sálong</hi> <cell>(resin)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>súl-ay</hi>      <cell>(belching of an infant)  <cell><hi lang=war>súlay</hi> <cell>(prop)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>bac-ad</hi>      <cell cols=3>(to unroll)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>os-og</hi>       <cell cols=3>(to draw near from afar)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>im-im</hi>       <cell cols=3>(lip)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>sid-ap</hi>      <cell cols=3>(to look at)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>san-o</hi>       <cell cols=3>(when, future)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>cacan-o</hi>     <cell cols=3>(when, past)<note n=A>In most of the towns of the island of Sámar, such separation as well as that by apostrophe is frequently disregarded, this being one of the most noticeable differences between the Sámar and Leyte dialects.</note>
</table>

<p>NOTE.&mdash;The above separations are not of the same character as those caused by contractions or elisions, where the proper sign is not a hyphen, but an apostrophe. As,

<table id=tb4.2>
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>gáb&apos;i</hi>       <cell>from <hi lang=war>gabii</hi>       <cell>(night)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>cabitón&apos;an</hi>, <cell>from <hi lang=war>cabitoónan</hi>  <cell>(stars)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>pabáy&apos;i</hi>,    <cell>from <hi lang=war>pabayái</hi>     <cell>(leave him or her)
    <row>
        <cell><hi lang=war>it&apos; im&apos; bugtò n&gtilde;an hit&apos; ac&apos; patód</hi>,
        <cell>from <hi lang=war>iton imo bugtò n&gtilde;an hitón acon patód</hi>
        <cell>(your brother or sister and my cousin).
</table>

<p>Therefore, it would not be correct to write <hi lang=war>gab-i, cabiton-an, pabay-i</hi>, where the apostrophe should be employed instead of the hyphen. However, the apostrophe is used only when needed to avoid wrong pronunciation or confusion. <pb id=pb5 n=5>So the last of the preceding examples is written without any sign of punctuation, thus: <hi lang=war>it im bugtò n&gtilde;an hit ac patód</hi>.




<div1 id=ch1.4>
<head>VOWELS</head>

<p>The Bisayan people, especially in Leyte, always have a tendency to separate the vowels in pronouncing the words, there being no Bisayan dipthong. So it is <hi lang=war>bi-ol</hi> (small basket) and not <hi lang=war>biol; cá-on</hi> (eat), <hi lang=war>ti-il</hi> (foot), <hi lang=war>ma-opay</hi> (good), and not <hi lang=war>cáon, tiil, maopay</hi>. But this refers only to spoken language, not to written.

<p>Some words, like <hi lang=war>uásay</hi> (axe), <hi lang=war>sabáo</hi> (broth) are pronounced <hi lang=war>ua-say, sa-bao</hi>, and not <hi lang=war>u-a-say, sa-ba-o</hi>. These syllables <hi>ua</hi> and <hi>ao</hi> are not dipthongs. The <hi>u</hi> in the syllable <hi>ua</hi> and the <hi>o</hi> in the syllable <hi>ao</hi>, are not the vowels <hi>u, o,</hi> but the consonant <hi>w</hi>. These words should be written more properly <hi lang=war>wásay, sabáw</hi>.<note n=1>See the note on the first page of this book. This is one of the facts that urge the adoption of a more logical alphabet (?) for the Bisayan tongue.</note>




<div1 id=ch1.5>
<head>SYLLABLES</head>

<p>Every vowel<note n=2>Except <hi>o</hi> and <hi>u</hi> when used as consonants, their function then being properly that of a <hi>w</hi>.</note> with the consonant or consonants pronounced with it and every vowel pronounced alone form one syllable, and are written as such. This is the rule applied to the division of a word at the end of a line. Examples:

<table id=tb5.1>
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>ca-ru-ca-yá-can</hi> <cell>(conversation)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>bác-dao</hi> <cell>(stand)
    <row><cell><hi lang=war>a-ha-cá</hi> <cell>(hemp), etc.
</table>




<div1 id=ch1.6>
<head>CAPITALIZATION</head>

<p>In Bisayan, the following words should begin with capitals:

<list>
    <item><ab type=itemNum>1.</ab> The first word of every sentence.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>2.</ab> The proper nouns.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>3.</ab> The names of the days of the week and the months of the year.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>4.</ab> Titles of honor or office.
    <pb id=pb6 n=6><item><ab type=itemNum>5.</ab> All words, except prepositions, conjunctions and unimportant adjectives, in the titles of books and essays.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>6.</ab> All names of God, and expressions referring to the Deity.
    <item><ab type=itemNum>7.</ab> Words representing important events in history and epochs of time.
</list>




<div1 id=ch1.7>
<head>CONTRACTIONS</head>

<p>There is no contraction used in Bisayan, except that in the sign <hi lang=war>m&gtilde;a</hi> (a particle employed to express the idea of plurality).

<p><hi lang=war>M&gtilde;a</hi> is for <hi lang=war>man&gtilde;a</hi> composed of <hi lang=war>ma</hi> (an important prefix of the Bisayan and Tagalog dialects, which bears the idea of abundance or plurality) and <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi> (a conjunctive particle which is necessarily employed to connect the variable parts of speech).

<p>NOTE. It would be desirable to have the following contractions adopted in Bisayan, inasmuch as they are universally recognized:


<table id=tb6.1 rend="columns(2)">
    <row><cell><hi>i.e.</hi> <cell><seg id=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>id est</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>e.g.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>exempli gratia</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>viz.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>videlicet</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>etc.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>et cetera</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>P.D.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>post data</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>P.S.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>post scriptum</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>N.B.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>nota bene</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>a.m.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>ante meridiem</hi>.
    <row><cell><hi>p.m.</hi> <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <hi lang=la>post meridiem</hi>.<note n=A>The author believes that it is better to adopt these contractions than to invent others of Bisayan origin for the reason that they afford signs universally understood, and because every tongue has a tendency to assimilate such universal signs.</note>
</table>





<div0 id=pt2>
<head>ETYMOLOGY.</head>

<div1 id=ch2.1>
<head>Parts of Speech.</head>

<p>These are eight in number, in Bisayan: article, noun, pronoun, verb, adverb, preposition, conjunction, interjection.



<pb id=pb7 n=7>
<div2 type=section id=ch2.1.1>
<head>ARTICLES.</head>

<p>There are three classes:

<table id=tb7.1>
    <row><cell>Definite:    <cell><hi>an</hi>                   <cell>(the)
    <row><cell>Indefinite:  <cell><hi>in</hi>                   <cell>(a)
    <row><cell>Personal:    <cell><hi>hi</hi> or <hi>si</hi>    <cell>(no equivalent in English).
</table>

<p>The definite article, as well as the indefinite, is used in Bisayan in the same manner as its equivalent in English. The definite article, however, is sometimes used before proper nouns, and it is very often used before the demonstrative and possessive pronouns. Examples:

<table id=tb7.2>
    <row><cell lang=war>Nacánhi <hi>an</hi> batà     <cell>(the boy or girl has come)
    <row><cell lang=war>Nacánhi <hi>in</hi> batà     <cell>(a boy or girl has come)
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>An</hi> Dyos<note n=1 lang=en>We do not write &ldquo;<hi lang=war>Dios</hi>&rdquo;, because it would be pronounced <hi lang=war>Di-os</hi>.&mdash;See &ldquo;Vowels&rdquo;, <hi>supra</hi>.</note> macagagáhum <cell>(God is omnipotent)
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>An</hi> iní nga bucád    <cell>(this flower)
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>An</hi> acon calò        <cell>(my hat)
</table>

<p>The personal article is always used before the names of persons; it is also used before the personal pronouns, except the third persons. Examples.

<table id=tb7.3>
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>Hi</hi> Pedro    <cell>(Peter)
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>Hi</hi> acó      <cell>(I)
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>Hi</hi> icao     <cell>(you)
</table>

<p>Instead of <hi lang=war>hi, si</hi> may be used.<note n=2><p>The use of <hi>s</hi> instead of the <hi>h</hi>, in these articles, depends upon the place where Bisayan is spoken. In the towns of Burawen, Dúlag and Abúyog, of the island of Leyte, and in some places in Sámar, the <hi>h</hi> is never used, but the <hi>s</hi> instead for these articles. Generally, it is considered more solemn to use the <hi>s</hi> instead of the <hi>h</hi>, in speeches, letters and poetry. But many times it is considered as a ridiculous affectation, in places where the <hi>h</hi> is used.

<p>It will be noted that, in some instances, the Bisayan people show a tendency to change the aspirate sound of the <hi>h</hi>, or soft sound of the Spanish <hi>j</hi>, into <hi>s</hi>. So in olden times, the name <hi lang=es>Juan</hi> was pronounced <hi>Suan</hi>; <hi lang=es>Jueves</hi> was pronounced <hi>Suebes</hi>; and from the Spanish <hi lang=es>jugar</hi>, they made the Bisayan word <hi lang=war>sugal</hi>, which is still in use.</note>

<p>These articles do not change in gender. Examples: <foreign lang=war><hi>an</hi> amáy</foreign> (the father), <foreign lang=war><hi>an</hi> iróy</foreign> (the mother); <foreign lang=war><hi>hi</hi> Juan</foreign> (John), <foreign lang=war><hi>hi</hi> María</foreign> (Mary).

<p>The definite and indefinite articles change in the plural in the following way:


<pb id=pb8 n=8><table id=tb8.1>
<column rend=center><column rend=center>
<row role=label>
    <cell>SINGULAR
    <cell>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell>an
    <cell>an m&gtilde;a<note n=A>See &ldquo;Contractions&rdquo;, <hi>supra</hi>. As it is seen, the <hi>m</hi> is for ma. This contraction shows exactly the way in which the Bisayan original letters were used. It is simply the ancient way of writing preserved after the adoption of the Spanish letters.</note>
<row>
    <cell>in
    <cell>in m&gtilde;a
</table>


<p>The personal article does not change, in person or number, except in the third person plural where it takes the form of the third personal pronoun third person, plural number. Examples:

<table id=tb8.2>
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>Hi</hi> quitá    <cell>(we)
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>Hi</hi> camó     <cell>(you, in plural)
    <row><cell lang=war><hi>Hirá</hi> Pedro n&gtilde;an hi Juan <cell>(Peter and John)
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.1.1 type=Subsection rend="toc-head(Declension)">
<p>DECLENSION.&mdash;Articles have two cases: <hi>nominative</hi> and <hi>objective</hi>.


<table id=tb8.3>
    <row role=label rend=center><cell>  <cell cols=3>SINGULAR                               <cell cols=3>PLURAL
    <row><cell>NOMINATIVE:  <cell>an         <cell>in         <cell>hi or si    <cell>an m&gtilde;a     <cell>in m&gtilde;a     <cell>hirá or sirá
    <row><cell>OBJECTIVE:   <cell>han or san <cell>hin or sin <cell>ni, can     <cell>han m&gtilde;a or san m&gtilde;a  <cell>hin m&gtilde;a or sin m&gtilde;a  <cell>nira, canda
</table>

<p>Examples:

<table id=tb8.4>
<row>
    <cell lang=war><hi>An</hi> batà nagbahása <hi>han</hi> surát ni Pedro
    <cell>(the boy reads Peter&apos;s letter).
<row>
    <cell lang=war><hi>Hirá</hi> Carlos n&gtilde;an <hi>hi</hi> Juan naghátag <hi>canda</hi> Tomás n&gtilde;an <hi>hi</hi> Pedro <hi>hin m&gtilde;a</hi> bucád
    <cell>(Charles and John gave flowers to Thomas and Peter).
</table>


<p>The objective case covers all the different cases used in other languages after the nominative, that is to say, the <hi>genitive, dative, accusative</hi> and <hi>ablative</hi> cases.

<p>RULES. 1. The Bisayan articles are used immediately before the words to which they refer.

<p>2. The definite article may be used without expressing the object to which it refers, having, in this case, the nature of a relative pronoun. Examples:

<table>
<row>
    <cell lang=war><hi>An</hi> nagtótoon, nahabábaro
    <cell>(He, who studies, learns).
<row>
    <cell lang=war><hi>An m&gtilde;a</hi> nagtututdò ha aton
    <cell>(They who teach us.)
</table>

<pb id=pb9 n=9><p>3. The personal article is always necessary before the names of persons. It is not correct to say &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>Pedro nagsusurat</foreign>&rdquo;; <hi lang=war>hi</hi> is needed, and it must be: &ldquo;<foreign lang=war><hi>hi</hi> Pedro nagsusurat</foreign>&rdquo; (Peter is writing).

<p>EXCEPTIONS. 1. Between the definite article and the word to which it refers, other words may be placed, in some instances, as in this phrase:

<table id=tb9.1>
<row><cell lang=war><hi>An</hi> iní n&gtilde;a <hi>baláy</hi>    <cell>(this house), or
<row><cell lang=war><hi>an</hi> maopay n&gtilde;a <hi>batà</hi>  <cell>(the good boy or girl).
</table>

<p>The regular order in constructing the last phrase is:

<table id=tb9.2>
<row><cell lang=war><hi>an batà</hi> n&gtilde;a maopay.
</table>

<p>2. When the names of persons are in the vocative case, the personal article is not used. Thus we say:

<table id=tb9.3>
<row><cell>Mariano, cadí dao    <cell>(Mariano, come, please).
<row><cell>Pamatì, Juan         <cell>(listen, John).
</table>

<p>3. In the objective case of <hi>hi, can</hi> is used before the verb, and <hi>ni</hi> after the verb. Examples:

<table id=tb9.4>
<row><cell lang=war>An <hi>can</hi> Juan guinsurát <cell>(what John wrote)
<row><cell lang=war>An guinsurát <hi>ni</hi> Juan <cell>(what John wrote)
</table>

<p>N.B.&mdash;The indefinite article, when needed at the beginning of the sentence, is replaced by the phrase &ldquo;<hi lang=war>usa n&gtilde;a</hi>&rdquo; So, if we wish to say &ldquo;a boy came yesterday,&rdquo; we should not say

<table id=tb9.5>
<row><cell><foreign lang=war><hi>in</hi> batà nacánhi cacolop</foreign>; but
<row><cell lang=war><hi>usá n&gtilde;a</hi> batà nacánhi cacolóp.
</table>

<p>This phrase <hi lang=war>usá n&gtilde;a</hi> is not a perfect article, but it has the character of an adjective, even when used as an article. Therefore, both the indefinite <hi lang=war>in</hi> and the phrase <hi lang=war>usá n&gtilde;a</hi> may be used in the same sentence. So, we can say, changing the regular order of the last sentence:

<table id=tb9.6>
<row><cell lang=war>Nacánhi cacolóp <hi>in usá n&gtilde;a</hi> bata <cell>(a boy came yesterday).
</table>


<div2 id=ch2.1.2>
<head>NOUNS</head>

<p>These are substantive and adjective. Both may be grouped <pb id=pb10 n=10>in the following classes: primitive, diminutive, figurative, verbal, compound, derivative, proper, common, positive, comparative, superlative, cardinal, ordinal, partitive, distributive and collective. Nothing particular needs be said about the primitive.

<div3 id=ch2.1.2.1>
<head>DIMINUTIVE</head>

<p>Examples:

<table id=tb10.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row role=label rend=center><cell cols=2>PRIMITIVE  <cell>DIMINUTIVE
    <row><cell lang=war>baláy    <cell>(house)       <cell lang=war>balay<hi>bálay</hi>
    <row><cell lang=war>saróual  <cell>(trousers)    <cell lang=war>sarouál<hi>ay</hi>
    <row><cell lang=war>carahà   <cell>(frying-pan)  <cell lang=war>carahá<hi>ay</hi>
    <row><cell lang=war>balóto   <cell>(little boat) <cell lang=war>balotó<hi>hay</hi>
</table>

<p>As is seen, the diminutive is formed by the repetition of the primitive or by adding to the latter the affix <hi lang=war>ay</hi> or <hi lang=war>hay</hi>.

<p>The primitive is repeated when it has not more than two syllables. As,

<p>from

<table id=tb10.2>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell lang=war>dáhon <cell>(leave), <cell lang=war>dahondáhon,
    <row><cell lang=war>cáhoy <cell>(tree),  <cell lang=war>cahoycáhoy.
</table>

<p>The affix <hi lang=war>ay</hi> or <hi lang=war>hay</hi> is added when the primitive has more than two syllables; <hi lang=war>ay</hi> being used in cases where the noun ends with a consonant, or a vowel with a grave or angular accent; and <hi lang=war>hay</hi> being employed when the primitive ends with a vowel otherwise accented or non-accented or a vowel that is pronounced separately from the consonant preceding it, or is preceded by more than one consonant. As,

<p>from

<table id=tb10.3>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell lang=war>sacayán  <cell>(boat),       <cell lang=war>sacayánay,
    <row><cell lang=war>habobò   <cell>(low),        <cell lang=war>habobóay,
    <row><cell lang=war>balicô   <cell>(crooked),    <cell lang=war>balicóay,<note n=A lang=en>This diminutive as well as the preceding does not need to be accented with grave and angular accent, as originally, first, because such accents are onlv used at the ending of the words (see the rule, page 3), and second, because the suspended guttural suund of the last vowel of its primitive is in some way preserved by means of the separation with which the vowels <hi>oa</hi> are pronounced (see &ldquo;Vowel&rdquo;, page 5)</note>
    <pb id=pb11 n=11>
    <row><cell lang=war>abacá    <cell>(hemp),       <cell lang=war>abacá<hi>hay</hi>,
    <row><cell lang=war>babaye   <cell>(woman),      <cell lang=war>babayé<hi>hay</hi>,
    <row><cell lang=war>banat-i  <cell>(a tree so called), <cell lang=war>banat-i<hi>hay</hi>,
    <row><cell lang=war>malacsi  <cell>(fast),       <cell lang=war>malacsi<hi>hay</hi>.
</table>

<p>But the dissyllabic primitive is not repeated when its first vowel is followed by more than one consonant, or when the last vowel has an acute accent or is pronounced separately from the consonant preceding it. In such cases the affix <hi>ay</hi> or <hi>hay</hi> is employed, the rules established for the use of these affixes being applicable to such diminutives. As,

<p>from

<table id=tb11.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell lang=war>támsi     <cell>(bird),       <cell lang=war>tamsí<hi>hay</hi>, not tamsitamsi,
    <row><cell lang=war>túl-an    <cell>(bone),       <cell lang=war>tul-án<hi>ay</hi>, not tul-antul-an,
    <row><cell lang=war>pulá      <cell>(red color),  <cell lang=war>pulá<hi>hay</hi>, not pulapula,<note n=1 lang=en>But if the primitive is <hi lang=war>mapulá</hi>, the diminutive will be <hi lang=war>mapulapula</hi>, as will be noted later.</note>
    <row><cell lang=war>sagpò     <cell>(plug),       <cell lang=war>sagpó<hi>ay</hi>, not sagposagpò,
    <row><cell lang=war>sab-a     <cell>(a kind of banana), <cell lang=war>sab-á<hi>hay</hi>, not sab-asab-a,
    <row><cell lang=war>bungto    <cell>(town),       <cell lang=war><choice><sic>bongtó<hi>hay</hi></sic><corr>bungtó<hi>hay</hi></corr></choice> not bungtobungto.
</table>

<p>Generally, as it has been observed in the preceding examples, the adjectives follow the same rules. As,

<p>from

<table id=tb11.2>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell lang=war>matám-is  <cell>(sweet),  <cell lang=war>matam-is<hi>ay</hi>,
    <row><cell lang=war>malomó    <cell>(soft),   <cell lang=war>malomó<hi>hay</hi>,
    <row><cell lang=war>halípot   <cell>(short),  <cell lang=war>halipót<hi>ay</hi>.
</table>

<p>But in must of the adjectives formed with <hi lang=war>ma</hi> (a particle bearing the idea of abundance) and <hi lang=war>ha</hi><note n=2>In some places in Leyte and Samar, this particle is <hi lang=war>hi</hi>, not <hi lang=war>ha</hi>, where it is said  <hi lang=war>hibobò, hilipot, hilabà, hitáas.</hi> But, in my opinion, it is simply a result of confounding the particle <hi lang=war>ma</hi> which is more proper for adjectives as it bears the idea of abundance, with the personal article <hi lang=war>hi</hi> with which it is thus intended to personify the abstract ideas of <hi lang=war>bobò, lipat, labà, táas</hi>.</note> (a particle that bears the idea of place), like <hi lang=war>maopay, mabusag, mapulá, hatáas, halabà,</hi> the prefixes <hi lang=war>ma</hi> or <hi lang=war>ha</hi> are disregarded in the formation of their diminutives, their abstract roots being the only elements taken into consideration, as if such <pb id=pb12 n=12>adjectives were dyssillabic. Thus, <hi lang=war>opay, busag, pulá, táas, lubà</hi>, being the abstract roots of the last mentioned adjectives, their diminutives will be:

<p>from

<table id=tb12.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell lang=war>maópay   <cell>(good),   <cell lang=war>maopay-<hi>ópay</hi>
    <row><cell lang=war>mabuság  <cell>(white),  <cell lang=war>mabusag<hi>búsag</hi>
    <row><cell lang=war>mapulá   <cell>(red),    <cell lang=war>mapula<hi>pulá</hi>
    <row><cell lang=war>hatáas   <cell>(high),   <cell lang=war>hataas<hi>táas</hi>
    <row><cell lang=war>halabà   <cell>(long),   <cell lang=war>halaba<hi>labà</hi><note n=1 lang=en>It has also the regular form &ldquo;<hi lang=war>halabáay</hi>&rdquo;.</note>
</table>

<p>There are some adjectives that have irregular diminutives. Such are the following:

<table id=tb12.2>
    <row role=label rend=center><cell cols=2>       <cell cols=2>DIMINUTIVE
    <row role=label><cell cols=2>from   <cell rend=center>REGULAR      <cell rend=center>IRREGULAR
    <row><cell>dacò <cell>(large),      <cell>dacòdacò     <cell>daco<hi>laay</hi><note n=2>This is a metathesis of &ldquo;<hi>dacoalay</hi>&rdquo;, by the transposition of the liquid consonant <hi>l</hi>; and this <hi>l</hi> in &ldquo;<hi>dacoalay</hi>&rdquo; has been substituted, for phonetical reason, for the <hi>y</hi> of &ldquo;<hi>dacoayay</hi>&rdquo;, which is the diminutive of &ldquo;<hi>dacoay</hi>&rdquo; not used.</note>
    <row><cell>gutì <cell>(small)       <cell>gutigutì     <cell>guti<hi>rurù</hi><note n=3>It seems that this diminutive is the contraction of &ldquo;<hi>gutiay<corr sic="&rdquo;"></corr> nya durò</hi>&rdquo;; it is not strictly a diminutve, it is a superlative.</note>
</table>


<div3 id=ch2.1.2.2>
<head>FIGURATIVE</head>

<p>We call those nouns <hi>figurative</hi> that are applied to the objects which, not being of the same nature as that which is expressed by their roots, show nevertheless analogy or similarity with those represented by the corresponding primitive, in their meaning, form, use, or application.

<p>Examples:

<p>from

<table id=tb12.3>
    <row><cell>bobón <cell>(fountain),  <cell>mobon<hi>bóbon</hi><note n=4>Transformed from <hi>bobonbòbon</hi>.</note> <cell>(fontanel);
    <row><cell>cabáyo <cell>(horse),    <cell><hi>caro</hi>cabáyo,  <cell rows=2>(objects that are like a horse or cloud).
    <row><cell>dámpog <cell>(cloud),    <cell><hi>daro</hi>dámpog,
</table>

<p>When the primitive has not more than two syllables, the formation of its figurative follows the same rules as those for the dissyllabic diminutive. As,

<p>from

<pb id=pb13 n=13><table id=tb13.1>
    <row><cell>hadì              <cell>(king), we have
    <row><cell><hi>hadi</hi>hadi <cell>(a person who, by his vanity or harshness, resembles the figure of a king).
</table>


<p>But when thy primitive has more than two syllables, or its last vowel is preceded by more than one consonant or is pronounced separately from the consonant&mdash;preceding it, its figurative is formed by adding to the root a prefix composed of its first syllable if it begins with a consonant or of its first vowel if it begins with a vowel and the syllable <hi>ro</hi> (a particle that bears the idea of imitation, repetition, or collection). As,

<p>from

<table id=tb13.2>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell>sacayán       <cell>(boat),       <cell><hi>saro</hi>sacáyan
    <row><cell>ulalahípan    <cell>(centipede),  <cell><hi>uro</hi>ulalahipan
    <row><cell>isdà          <cell>(fish),       <cell><hi>iro</hi>isdà
    <row><cell>can&apos;on        <cell>(cooked rice) <cell><hi>caro</hi>can&apos;on<note n=1>We do not write <hi>can-on,</hi> because it is a contraction of <hi>caran&apos;on</hi>, which is also contracted from <hi>caraonón</hi>.</note>
</table>

<p>NOTE.&mdash;Many of the figurative nouns have the same forms as the collective. There are few figuratives among the adjectives; of these, those having the form of figuratives are really comparatives.<note n=2>See &ldquo;Comparative&rdquo; and &ldquo;Collective&rdquo;, <hi><corr sic=supra resp=errata>infra</corr></hi>.</note>




<div3 id=ch2.1.2.3>
<head>VERBAL</head>


<p>These are formed from the verb-root transformed by particles referring to the agents or the objects of the roots.

<p>Examples:

<p>from

<list>
    <item>sáyau (to dance)
        <list>
            <item><hi>para</hi>sayáu (dancer),
            <item><hi>tig</hi>sayáu (person who sometimes dances),
            <item><hi>mag</hi>sa<hi>ra</hi>yáu (person appointed to dance)
            <item>sarayau<hi>án</hi><note n=3>The last <hi>u</hi> is not a vowel properly; it should be the consonant <hi>w</hi>. See notes on pages 1 and 5 of this book.</note> (place designed for dancing).
            <pb id=pb14 n=14><item>sarayauón (dance or musical piece to be danced)<note n=A>It also means anxiety for dancing. So from <hi>isóg</hi> (to enrage), it is said: &ldquo;<hi>daco it ac isogón</hi>&rdquo; (contracted from <hi>irisogón</hi>), my rage is great.</note>;
        </list>
</list>

<p>from

<list>
    <item>umá (to farm)
        <list>
            <item><hi>para</hi>úma (farmer),
            <item><hi>tig</hi>-úma (person used to do farming),
            <item><hi>mag</hi>-u<hi>rú</hi>ma (person in charge of farming),
            <item>u<hi>ru</hi>má<hi>han</hi>, contracted u<hi>rú</hi>m<hi>han</hi> (place designed for farming),
            <item>u<hi>ru</hi>má<hi>hon</hi>, contracted u<hi>rú</hi>m<hi>hon</hi> (ground or plant to be cultivated);
        </list>
</list>

<p>from

<list>
    <item>surat (to write), the similar verbals as above, so far as the idea of the root and the use permit, with this variant:
        <list>
            <item>su<hi>su</hi>rát<hi>an</hi>, not su<hi>ru</hi>rát<hi>an</hi>,
            <item>su<hi>su</hi>rát<hi>on</hi>, not su<hi>ru</hi>rát<hi>on</hi>;
        </list>
</list>

<p>from

<list>
    <item>toóc (to weep), the similar verbals, so far as the root and the use permit, and this besides:
        <list>
            <item><hi>ma</hi>tóoc (weeper);
        </list>
</list>

<p>from

<list>
    <item>bóon&gtilde; (to break), the similar verbals, and this:
        <list>
            <item><hi>ma</hi>bo<hi>ro</hi>ón&gtilde; (liable or expected to be broken);
        </list>
</list>

<p>from

<list>
    <item>inóm (to drink), the similar verbals, and the following:
        <list>
            <item><hi>ma</hi>inom<hi>inóm</hi> (an inviting drink);
        </list>
</list>

<p>from

<list>
    <item>sosón (to correct), the similar verbals, and this:
        <list>
            <item><hi>hin</hi>óson (person fond of or bold in correcting);
        </list>
</list>

<pb id=pb15 n=15><p>from

<list>
    <item>útan&gtilde; (to borrow),
        <list>
            <item><hi>hin&gtilde;</hi>útan&gtilde; or <hi>hin&gtilde;un&gtilde;</hi>után&gtilde;<note n=1>The second syllable of the combined prefix is sometimes doubled to make the sentence more emphatic.</note> (person fond of or bold in borrowing).
        </list>
</list>

<p>It may be observed that not all of the verb-roots produce the same number of verbal nouns. It depends on the particular character of every idea conveyed in the root, and mainly on the use.

<p>From the preceding examples, it is seen that the transformative particles of the verbal nouns are various, the said particles being the prefixes <hi>para, tig, mag, ma, hi,</hi> the interfixes<note n=2><hi>Interfix</hi> is there used to designate the particle placed within a word.</note> <hi> r, ro, um</hi> or the affixes <hi>an, on.</hi> These particles are very important in Bisayan as they greatly help to enrich the limited vocabulary of this tongue.

<p>For the sake of clearness, we shall see first the affixes.


<div4 type=Subsubsection>
<head>An, on.</head>


<p>These particles refer to the complement of the verb-root, <hi>an</hi> to the indirect object of the action (generally regarding the place where the act occurs), and <hi>on</hi> to the direct object (generally referring to the termination of the action).

<p><hi>An</hi> or <hi>on</hi> is used when the root ends with a consonant or a vowel <corr sic=wich resp=errata>with</corr> a grave or angular accent.

<p>An <hi>h</hi> preceds them when the roots ends with a vowel otherwise accented or non-accented, or pronounced separately from the preceding consonant or consonants.

<p>The particle <hi>an</hi> or <hi>han</hi> is simply added to the root, as,

<p>from

<table id=tb15.1>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
<row>
    <cell>catúrog                   <cell>(to sleep),
    <cell>caturog<hi>án</hi>        <cell>(sleeping place);
<row>
    <cell>sin&gtilde;ba             <cell>(to adore),
    <cell>sin&gtilde;bá<hi>han</hi> <cell>(church);
<row>
    <cell>taclob                    <cell>(to cover)<corr>,</corr>
    <cell>taclób<hi>an</hi><note n=3>Such is the name of the present capital of the province of Leyte. According to a tradition, this name originated from the fact that before the town was formed, a point of the eastern coast of its present site was known as a place where fishes were taken from the sea by a bamboo instrument, like a cover called <hi>taclob</hi>.</note> <cell>(covering place);
<pb id=pb16 n=16><row>
    <cell>tan-ao                    <cell>(to see at a distance),
    <cell>tan-ao<hi>an</hi><note n=1>It is the name of one of the most important towns in Leyte, located on the eastern coast of said island. Also according to a tradition, in the southwestern part of the present site of that town, before the town was built, there was a large tall tree, from whose prominent branches the people used to watch (<hi>tan-ao</hi>) the Moros from Sulu, when invading the coasts of Leyte.&mdash;The last <hi>o</hi> of this <hi>tan-ao</hi> is properly the consonat <hi>w</hi>.</note> <cell>(watching place);
</table>

<p>or is employed either with the interfix <hi>r</hi> combined with the first vowel of the root or with the first consonant and vowel of the root instead, as

<p>from

<table id=tb16.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell>cáon <cell>(to eat) <cell>ca<hi>ra</hi>on<hi>án</hi>
</table>

<p>from

<table id=tb16.2>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
    <row><cell>tíroc <cell>(to assembly) <cell><hi>ti</hi>tiroe<hi>án</hi> <cell>(meeting place);
</table>

<p>or with its first vowel if the root commences with a vowel, as

<p>from

<table id=tb16.3>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
    <row><cell>aro <cell>(to ask) <cell><hi>a</hi>aroán <cell>(place designed for asking).
</table>

<p>The particle <hi>on</hi> has the same use as <hi>an</hi>, as

<table id=tb16.4>
    <row><cell>caturog<hi>ón</hi>,              <cell>
    <row><cell>si<hi>ri</hi>ngba<hi>hon</hi>,   <cell>
    <row><cell>li<hi>li</hi>bác<hi>on</hi>      <cell>(from <hi>libác</hi>, to backbite),
    <row><cell><hi>a</hi>aro<hi>on</hi>.        <cell>
</table>

<p>NOTE.&mdash;The affix <hi>an</hi> is sometimes doubled, as,

<p>from

<table id=tb16.5>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell>lohód <cell>(to kneel down), <cell>lod<hi>hanán</hi><note n=2>From <hi>lolodhanan</hi> from <hi>lolohodanan</hi>, where the <hi>ó</hi> is suppressed, and the <hi>h</hi> and <hi>d</hi>, transposed, for phonetical reasons.</note>
</table>

<p>from

<table id=tb16.6>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
    <row><cell>tambò <cell>(to lock out), <cell>tambo<hi>ànan</hi>, from <hi>tambóan</hi> <cell>(window).
</table>


<div4>
<head>Para, tig.</head>


<p><hi>Para</hi> bears the idea of habit, custom or occupation. <hi>Tig</hi> conveys the idea of a repeated, but not frequent, act.

<pb id=pb17 n=17><p>They are simply prefixed to the root without any other complementary particle, as,

<p>from

<list>
    <item>cánhi (to come).
        <list>
            <item><hi>para</hi>cánhi,
            <item><hi>tig</hi>cánhi.
        </list>
</list>


<div4>
<head><hi>Ma</hi>, with <hi>on</hi>, with <hi>ro</hi>, or with <hi>r</hi>.</head>


<p>The particle <hi>ma</hi> conveys the idea of fondness, desirableness, or passive potentiality or possibility.

<p>When, it means fondness, it is employed either by putting it at the beginning of the root without any other particle, as

<p>from

<table id=tb17.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
    <row><cell>cáon <cell>(to eat), <cell><hi>ma</hi>cáon <cell>(glutton),
</table>

<p>or by combining it with the affix <hi>on</hi> or <hi>hon</hi>, according to the case, as

<p>from

<table id=tb17.2>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
    <row><cell>catúrog <cell>(to sleep), <cell><hi>ma</hi>caturog<hi>ón</hi> <cell>(sleepy head),
</table>

<p>from

<table id=tb17.3>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
    <row><cell>arába <cell>(to moan), <cell><hi>ma</hi>araba<hi>hón</hi> <cell>(person fond of moaning).
</table>

<p>When the prefix <hi>ma</hi>, bears the idea of desirableness, it is placed before the doubled root, when the root has not more than two syllables and its last vowel is preceded by not more than two consonants or is not pronounced separately from its preceding consonant or consonants, as


<p>from

<table id=tb17.4>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>
    <row><cell>cáon, <cell><hi>ma</hi>caon<hi>caón</hi> <cell>(thing inviting to be eaten)<note n=A>As when we say: &ldquo;<hi>macaoncaón iní n&gtilde;a bayábas</hi>&rdquo; (this guava is inviting). The idea of fondness sometimes takes the same form, as <hi>&ldquo;macaoncaón ini n&gtilde;a sorogóon&rdquo;</hi> (this servant is fond of eating surreptitiously). This form is also used for impersonal verbs, as will be seen later, as: &ldquo;<hi>macaoncáon na</hi>&rdquo; (I have appetite already).</note>
</table>

<pb id=pb18 n=18><p>from

<table id=tb18.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>
    <row><cell>oná <cell>(to commence), <cell><hi>ma</hi>onao<hi>ná</hi> <cell>(provocative, quarrelsome),
</table>

<p>and in cases where the root has more than two syllables, or if not, where its last vowel is preceded by more than two consonants or is pronounced separately from the consonant or consonants preceding it, then this prefix is employed in combination with the interfix <hi>ro</hi> preceded by the first consonant and vowel of the root or by the vowel only if the root begins with a vowel, as<corr sic=. resp=errata></corr>

<table id=tb18.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

    <row><cell><seg id=from>from</seg> <cell cols=2>catúrog, <cell><hi>macaro</hi>caturóg,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>bányac, <cell>(to kick), <cell><hi>maharo</hi>bányac,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>síd-ap, <cell>(to look at)<corr>,</corr> <cell><hi>masiro</hi>síd-ap,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell cols=2>arába, <cell><hi>maaro</hi>arabá,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>ígham, <cell>(to grunt), <cell><hi>mairo</hi>ígham,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>ós-og <cell>(to draw near from afar), <cell><hi>maoro</hi>ós-og.
</table>

<p>When the particle <hi>ma</hi> conveys the idea of passive potentiality or possibility, it is used with the interfix <hi>r</hi> combined with the first vowel of the root. The <hi>r</hi> with its complementary vowel is put after the first syllable of the root. As,

<table id=tb18.3>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>bóong <cell>(to break), <cell lang=war><hi>ma</hi>bo<hi>ro</hi>óng <cell>(brittle)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>abót <cell>(to reach), <cell lang=war><hi>ma</hi>a<hi>rá</hi>bot <cell>(attainable).
</table>

<p>The particle <hi lang=war>ma</hi> is frequently replaced by the prefix <hi lang=war>ig</hi> or <hi lang=war>i</hi> combined with the interfix <hi lang=war>r</hi> or its substitutes, as

<table id=tb18.4>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>tambal <cell>(to cure), <cell><hi lang=war>igtarámbal</hi> or <hi lang=war>itárambal</hi> <cell>(medicine),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>surat <cell>(to write), <cell><hi lang=war>isusúrat</hi> <cell>(thing to write with).
</table>


<div4>
<head><hi><corr sic=Mga resp=errata lang=war>Mag</corr></hi> and the <hi lang=war>r</hi>.</head>


<p>The prefix <hi lang=war>mag</hi> bears the idea of forcible, necessary, or continuous agency. It is employed with the interfix <hi lang=war>r</hi> combined with and before the first vowel of the root. This combination is placed between the first and the second syllable of the root. But when there is an <hi lang=war>r</hi> in the root, the interfix <hi lang=war>r</hi> is replaced by the first consonant of the <pb id=pb19 n=19>said root. If the root begins with a vowel, the interfix <hi lang=war>r</hi> is sometimes suppressed, the said first vowel being used instead of the interfix. As,

<table id=tb19.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row>
        <cell>from
        <cell lang=war>sódoy
        <cell>(to stroll about)<corr>,</corr>
        <cell lang=war><hi>mag</hi>so<hi>to</hi>dóy
        <cell>(one who strolls about)
    <row>
        <cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg>
        <cell lang=war>bilín&gtilde;
        <cell>(to seek or search),
        <cell lang=war><hi>mag</hi>bi<hi>rí</hi>lin&gtilde;
        <cell>(searcher),
    <row>
        <cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg>
        <cell lang=war>sirín&gtilde;
        <cell>(to request),
        <cell lang=war><hi>mag</hi>si<hi>sí</hi>rin&gtilde;,
        <cell>(petitioner), not magsirírin&gtilde;,
    <row>
        <cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg>
        <cell lang=war>ósoc
        <cell>(to set up),
        <cell lang=war><hi>mag</hi>-o<hi>ro</hi>sóc
        <cell>(person designed to set up),
    <row>
        <cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg>
        <cell lang=war>arót
        <cell>(to cut the hair),
        <cell lang=war><choice resp=errata><sic><hi>mag</hi>-á<hi>a</hi>rot</sic><corr><hi>mag</hi>-a<hi>á</hi>rot</corr></choice>
        <cell>(barber).
</table>

<p>The particle <hi lang=war>mag</hi> is frequently contracted into <hi lang=war>ma</hi>, in which case the root is considered as having an <hi lang=war>r</hi>, as

<table id=tb19.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row>
        <cell>from
        <cell lang=war>suláy
        <cell>(to tempt),
        <cell lang=war>m<hi>anu</hi>núlay
        <cell>(tempter),
    <row>
        <cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg>
        <cell lang=war>tában&gtilde;
        <cell>(to assist),
        <cell lang=war>m<hi>ana</hi>nában&gtilde;
        <cell>(helper).
</table>


<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Hi</hi></head>


<p>This particle conveys the idea of boldness. When the root begins with a labial consonant, except the <hi>m</hi>, the said consonant is transformed into <hi>m</hi>, as

<table id=tb19.3>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>bása <cell>(to read), <cell lang=war><hi>him</hi>ása <cell>(person bold<corr sic=")" resp=errata></corr> in reading<corr resp=errata>)</corr>,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>pitíc <cell>(to leap), <cell lang=war><hi>him</hi>ític <cell>(person bold in leaping).
</table>

<p>When the root begins with an <hi lang=war>m</hi>, the prefix <hi lang=war>hi</hi> is not commonly used but the prefix <hi lang=war>para ma, or tig</hi>, as

<table id=tb19.4>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>múlay <cell>(to teach)<corr>,</corr> <cell lang=war><hi>para-, ma-,</hi> or <hi>tig</hi>mulay, not <hi>hi</hi>múlay,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>mogó <cell>(to observe), <cell lang=war><hi>para-, ma-,</hi> or <hi>tig</hi>mógo, not <hi>hi</hi>mógo.
</table>

<p>When the root begins with a vowel, <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;</hi> is<note n=A>I say &ldquo;<hi>is</hi>&rdquo;, because this combination <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;</hi> is properly one letter in Bisayan, which should be called <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi>, as anciently.</note> appended to the prefix; <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;</hi> is also appended when the root begins with a guttural consonant, but then the said consonant is suppressed. As,

<table id=tb19.5>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>ásoy <cell>(to refer), <cell lang=war><hi>hin&gtilde;</hi>ásoy <cell>(garrolous),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>cáon <cell>(to eat) <cell lang=war><hi>hing</hi>áon <cell>(bold in eating),
    <pb id=pb20 n=20><row><cell><seg copyOf=from>from</seg> <cell lang=war>gúbat <cell>(to invade),<cell> <hi lang=war>hin&gtilde;</hi>úbat <cell>(bold in invading).
</table>

<p>When the root commences with the nasal consonant <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;</hi>, the prefix <hi>hi</hi> is ordinarily replaced by the prefix <hi lang=war>para</hi>, <hi lang=war>ma</hi>, or <hi lang=war>tig</hi>, or the first syllable of the root is made long, as

<table id=tb20.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>n&gtilde;isi <cell>(to laugh, showing the teeth), <cell lang=war><hi>para-, ma,</hi> or <hi>ti&gtilde;</hi>ngisi, or <hi lang=war>ñgisi</hi> <cell>(person fond of grinning).
</table>

<p>When the root begins with any other consonant, except <hi lang=war>l, n, r</hi>, the said consonant is suppressed and the letter <hi lang=war>n</hi> is appended to the prefix, as

<table id=tb20.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>dolóng, <cell>(to struggle), <cell lang=war><hi>hin</hi>ólong <cell>(bold in struggling),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>sosón <cell>(to correct), <cell lang=war><hi>hin</hi>óson <cell>(bold in correcting),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>tápod <cell>(to confide), <cell lang=war><hi>hin</hi>ápod<note n=1 lang=en>This is also a verbal of <hi lang=war>sapód</hi> (to gather).</note> <cell>(bold in confiding)
</table>

<p>In all of these cases, the syllable following the prefix <hi lang=war>hi</hi> is sometimes doubled, according to the use, as,

<table id=tb20.3>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>himític, <cell lang=war>himi<hi>mí</hi>tic,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>hin&gtilde;ásoy, <cell lang=war>hin&gtilde;a<hi>n&gtilde;a</hi>sóy,
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>hinóson, <cell lang=war>hino<hi>no</hi>son,<note n=2 lang=en>The particle <hi lang=war>hi</hi> sometimes with the verbs and especially among the derivative nouns conveys the idea of &ldquo;payment for&rdquo;, as when from the verbs <hi lang=war>budlay</hi> (to tire one&apos;s self), <hi lang=war>salacáy</hi>, (to embark), and the nouns <hi lang=war>apóy</hi> (grandfather or grandmother), <hi lang=war>púsod</hi> (navel), it is said: <hi lang=war>himudlay</hi> (any thing given as in payment of any work);&mdash;<hi lang=war>hinálacay</hi> (payment for passage);&mdash;<hi lang=war>hingapóy</hi> (a present given to a grandfather or grandmother upon the the marriage of his or her grand daughter under the consideration of the former&apos;s being the grandfather or grandmother of the latter);&mdash;<hi lang=war>himósod</hi> (present given to the midwife for cutting and attending to the navel of a new-born child).</note> etc.
</table>


<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Um</hi>.</head>


<p>This particle bears the idea of option. It is used among the verbs for the subjunctive mode. It is always combined with the interfix <hi>r</hi> or its substitutes, and is placed between the first consonant and the first vowel of the root. When the root begins with a vowel, the interfix is placed immediately before the vowel. Examples:

<table id=tb20.4>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>cáon <cell>(to eat), <cell lang=war><hi>cumaraón</hi> <cell>(person going to, or expected to, eat),
    <pb id=pb21 n=21><row><cell><seg copyOf=from>from</seg> <cell lang=war>abót <cell>(to arrive), <cell lang=war><hi>um</hi>a<hi>rá</hi>bot <cell>(person expected to arrive),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>arò <cell>(to ask), <cell lang=war><hi>uma</hi>arô <cell>(person expected to ask).
</table>

<p>Some roots without <hi lang=war>r</hi> follow the rule as if they had an <hi lang=war>r</hi>, as,

<table id=tb21.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>sacá <cell>(to go up, to board), <cell lang=war>s<hi>um</hi>as<hi>á</hi>ca <cell>(boarder).
</table>

<p>Observations: 1. There are verbals formed with <hi lang=war>ma</hi> combined with the interfix <hi lang=war>r</hi> or its substitutes. This formation takes place only in the intransitive verbs commencing with the particle <hi>ca</hi> which then conveys the idea of passivity. As,

<table id=tb21.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>caauód <cell>(to be ashamed), <cell lang=war>macaaráuod <cell>(shameful),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>cabóron&gtilde; <cell>(to be confused), <cell lang=war>macabobóron&gtilde; <cell>(confusing),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>casína <cell>(to be angry), <cell lang=war>macasisína <cell>(odious).
</table>


<p>2. The infinitives of the verbs, which are always preceded by the particle <hi lang=war>pag</hi>, are frequently employed as substantives. In such cases the particle <hi lang=war>pag</hi> is transformed in the plural, its <hi lang=war>g</hi> being then replaced by the letter <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;</hi> if the root begins with a vowel or a guttural consonant, except <hi lang=war>g</hi>, or by the consonant <hi lang=war>n</hi> when the root commences with a dental consonant, or by the <hi lang=war>m</hi> if it begins with a labial. In the plural, the roots commencing with a consonant lose said consonant. When the root begins with a nasal or with the guttural <hi lang=war>g</hi>, said consonant is preserved and the <hi lang=war>g</hi> of <hi lang=war>pag</hi> is replaced by <hi lang=war>n</hi>. Examples:

<p>from <foreign lang=war>arò</foreign> (to ask), <foreign lang=war>cáon</foreign> (to eat), <foreign lang=war>dáop</foreign> (to approach) <foreign lang=war>bása</foreign> (to read), <foreign lang=war>n&gtilde;oyn&gtilde;oy</foreign> (to groan), <foreign lang=war>gábot</foreign> (to, pull), we have:


<table id=tb21.3 lang=war>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

    <row role=label rend=center lang=en><cell cols=2>SINGULAR        <cell>PLURAL
    <row><cell>pag-arò <cell lang=en>(asking)            <cell>pan&gtilde;arò,
    <row><cell>pagcáon <cell lang=en>(eating)            <cell>pan&gtilde;áon,
    <row><cell>pagdáop <cell lang=en>(approaching)       <cell>panáop,
    <row><cell>pagbása <cell lang=en>(reading)           <cell>pamása,
    <row><cell>pagngoyngoy <cell lang=en>(groaning)      <cell>panngóyagoy,
    <row><cell>paggábot <cell lang=en>(pulling)          <cell>pangábot,
</table>


<pb id=pb22 n=22><p>3. The infinitives of roots commencing with the particle <hi lang=war>ca</hi> are also used as substantives, and then with or without the prefix <hi lang=war>pag</hi>.

<table id=tb22.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>cabido <cell>(to be sorry), <cell lang=war>pagcabídò, cabídò, <cell>(sorrow).
</table>

<p>In such cases, the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi> or <hi lang=war>on</hi> is sometimes employed, as

<table id=tb22.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>casáquit <cell>(to be sad), <cell lang=war>casaquítan <cell>(sadness),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>casína <cell>(to be angry), <cell lang=war>casinahón <cell>(anger).
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.2.4>
<head>COMPOUND</head>

<p>The use gives the following:

<table id=tb22.3>
    <row>
        <cell>from <hi lang=war>solód</hi> (to enter) and <hi lang=war>baláy</hi> (house),
        <cell><hi lang=war>sólodbálay</hi>, which means the person who thru his intimacy with the occupant of a house, enters in at any time;
    <row>
        <cell>from <hi lang=war>sacá</hi> (to go up) and <hi lang=war>lúsad</hi> (to go down),
        <cell><hi lang=war>sacálúsad</hi>, applied to the person who is very busy or who suffers a great misfortune and goes up and down the house repeatedly. It is also applied to boys or girls who go out the house frequently, especially without permission of their parents;
    <row>
        <cell>from <hi lang=war>dosô</hi> (to push) and <hi lang=war>bótong</hi> (to pull),
        <cell><hi lang=war>dosô-bótong</hi>,<note n=A>We use a hyphen in this word on account of the angular accent of the last <hi lang=war>o</hi> of the first verb.</note> applied to a person who takes determinations that are contradictory;
    <row>
        <cell>from <hi lang=war>cábcab</hi> (to scratch) and <hi lang=war>tocâ</hi> (what a bird does when it picks up or bites something with its beak),
        <cell><hi lang=war>cábcabtocâ</hi>, applied to persons who have to expend for their subsistence all that they gain by their work;
    <row>
        <cell>from <hi lang=war>di</hi>, contraction of <hi lang=war>dirì</hi> (not), <hi lang=war>abotón</hi>, from <hi lang=war>abót</hi> (to reach), and <hi lang=war>calóton</hi>, from cálot (to scratch),
        <pb id=pb23 n=23><cell><hi lang=war>diabotóncalóton</hi>, applied to that part of the human back, which our hands <hi>cannot reach</hi> to <hi>scratch</hi> when it itches;
    <row>
        <cell>from <hi lang=war>tábag</hi> (help), <hi lang=war>ha</hi>, a preposition for the objective case, <hi lang=war>amon&gtilde;ámon&gtilde;</hi> (to malign);
        <cell><hi lang=war>tabaghaamon&gtilde;-ámon&gtilde;,</hi> applied to those who maliciously pretend to help a person in trouble, but injure him. Etc.
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.2.5>
<head>DERIVATIVE</head>

<p><corr sic=Whe resp=errata>We</corr> consider under this heading the nouns derived from other nouns. Those originated from a verb are already treated as verbals. Most of the derivatives are adjectives.

<p>The derivatives, like the verbal, are formed with particles, prefixes, interfixes, and affixes.

<p>The usual particles are <hi lang=war>ca, ma, maca, mag, maqui, hi, pala, tag,</hi> as prefixes; <hi lang=war>r, in</hi> as interfixes; and <hi lang=war>an, on</hi> as affixes. As,

<table id=tb23.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>pauà <cell>(light), <cell lang=war><hi>ca</hi>panà <cell>(clearness)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>áram <cell>(wisdom), <cell lang=war><hi>ma</hi>áram <cell>(wise)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>bayáu <cell>(brother in law), <cell lang=war><hi>ma</hi>ba<hi>rá</hi>yau <cell>(brother-in-law-to-be)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>bidò <cell>(sorrow), <cell lang=war><hi>maca</hi>bi<hi>bi</hi>dò <cell>(sorrowful)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>isdà <cell>(fish), <cell lang=war><hi>maqui</hi>isdà <cell>(fond of fish)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>púsod <cell>(navel), <cell lang=war><hi>hi</hi>mósod <cell>(payment for attending to the navel of a new-born child)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>bugtò <cell>(brother or sister), <cell lang=war><hi>mag</hi>bugtò <cell>(referring to two persons who are brothers or sisters)<note n=1>When the brothers or sisters referred to are more than two, then the interfix <hi>r</hi> is used, as <hi>mag</hi>bu<hi>rugtò</hi>.</note>
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>bisaya <cell>(bisayan), <cell lang=war><hi>bin</hi>isaya <cell>(bisayan tongue)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>salâ <cell>(fault or guilt), <cell lang=war>salá<hi>an</hi> <cell>(guilty)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>búuà<note n=2>The second <hi>u</hi> must be the consonant <hi>w</hi>.</note> <cell>(lie), <cell lang=war>buuá<hi>on</hi> <cell>(<corr sic=lier resp=errata>liar</corr>).
</table>

<pb id=pb24 n=24><p><hi>Ca</hi> bears the idea of quality, and is used alone or in combination with the affix <hi>an</hi>. As

<table id=tb24.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>hatáas <cell>(high), <cell lang=war>cahatáas <cell>(height),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>dáot <cell>(bad), <cell lang=war>caraótan, carát&apos;an <cell>(badness).
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war><corr sic="pauá" resp=errata>pauà</corr> <cell>(light), <cell lang=war><corr sic="capauá" resp=errata>capauà</corr> <cell>(clearness).
</table>

<p>It is sometimes combined with the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi> and the joined affix <hi lang=war>anon</hi>, as

<table id=tb24.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>masúgot <cell>(obedient), <cell lang=war>camasinug&apos;tánon <cell>(obedience).
</table>

<p><hi lang=war>Ma</hi> conveys the idea of abundance and future condition. In the first case, it is added at the beginning of the primitive, which is the form of great many adjectives, as,

<table id=tb24.3>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>ísog <cell>(courage, rage), <cell lang=war><hi>ma</hi>ísog <cell>(courageous);
</table>

<p rend=noindent>and when it means future condition, it is used with the interfix <hi lang=war>r</hi> combined with the first vowel of the primitive, as,

<table id=tb24.4>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>asáua <cell>(wife), <cell lang=war><hi>ma</hi>a<hi>ra</hi>sauá <cell>(woman betrothed)
</table>

<p>The particle <hi lang=war>ma</hi> is frequently combined with the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi> and the affix <hi lang=war>on</hi> or <hi lang=war>ánon</hi>. In plural, the <hi lang=war>ma</hi> is appended with <hi lang=war>g</hi>. As

<table id=tb24.5>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>túman <cell>(performance), <cell lang=war>matinumánon <cell>(faultless) plural, magtinumánon
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>sugót <cell>(obedience), <cell lang=war>masinug&apos;tánon <cell>(obedient)
</table>


<p>It is also used without any affix, and then the primitive is doubled as from tubâ (a wine) matubatubâ (person or thing that smells as tubâ).

<p><hi lang=war>Maca</hi> has the idea of potentiality, and is added to the beginning of the primitive, by doubling the first syllable of the primitive or by using the intermix <hi lang=war>r</hi> combined with the first vowel of the primitive. As,

<table id=tb24.6>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>álo <cell>(shame), <cell lang=war><hi>macaa</hi>álo <cell>(shameful),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>lípay <cell>(joy), <cell lang=war><hi>macali</hi>lípay <cell>(rejoicer),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>budlay <cell>(grievance), <cell lang=war><hi>maca</hi>bu<hi>rú</hi>dlay <cell>(grievous).
</table>

<p><hi>Mag</hi> conveys the idea of mutual relationship, and also <pb id=pb25 n=25>of continuity in a few cases. It is <corr sic=simyly resp=errata>simply</corr> added at the beginning of the primitive.

<p>Relationship. Examples:

<table id=tb25.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>patód <cell>(cousin), <cell lang=war><hi>mag</hi>patód <cell>(cousins each other).
</table>

<p>It is sometimes appended with <hi lang=war>tala</hi>, as from amáy (father), <hi>magtala</hi>amáy (father and son, or father and daughter).

<p>The derivatives formed with <hi lang=war>mag</hi> conveying the idea of mutual relationship, are always in plural.

<p>Continuity. Examples:

<table id=tb25.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>ága <cell>(morning), <cell lang=war><hi>Mag</hi>-ága <cell>(the whole night until the morning);
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>colóp <cell>(evening); <cell lang=war><hi>mag</hi>cólop <cell>(the whole day until the evening.)
</table>

<p><hi>Maqui</hi> signifies the idea of fondness, and is employed without any other transformative particle, as,

<table id=tb25.3>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row>
        <cell>from
        <cell lang=war>Dyos<note n=1 lang=en>This is the modern way of pronouncing this word. The old way consisted in making two syllables out of this word, and according to that pronounciation, it is written <hi lang=war>Diyos</hi> (prouounced Di-yos), not <hi>Dyos</hi>.</note>
        <cell>(God),
        <cell lang=war><hi>maqui</hi>dyos
        <cell>(pious).
</table>

<p>It is used in very few cases to form verbals, as

<table id=tb25.4>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>hámpan&gtilde; <cell>(to be present during a conversation), <cell lang=war><hi>maquiha</hi>hampan&gtilde;<hi>on</hi> <cell>(person fond of being present or <corr sic=take resp=errata>taking</corr> part in a conversation).
</table>

<p><hi>Hi</hi>, as transformative particle of derivatives, conveys the idea of boldness, and also of consideration, or of payment. We have seen that it means boldness when joined to verbs to form verbal nouns<note n=2>See &ldquo;<hi lang=war>Hi</hi>&rdquo;, under the heading &ldquo;Verbal&rdquo; <hi>supra</hi>.</note>. As to its use, it follows here the same rules as when employed with verbs. Examples:

<table id=tb25.5>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>quinatsilâ <cell>(Spanish language), <cell lang=war><hi>hin&gtilde;</hi>inatsilà <cell>(one who ventures to talk Spanish, knowing but little of it).
    <pb id=pb26 n=26><row><cell><seg copyOf=from>from</seg> <cell lang=war>apóy <cell>(grandfather), <cell lang=war><hi>hin&gtilde;</hi>apóy <cell>
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>púsod <cell>(navel), <cell lang=war><hi>him</hi>ósod<note n=A lang=en>See note 2 on page 20.</note> <cell>
</table>

<p><hi>Pala</hi> means resemblance. It is combined with the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi>. As,

<table id=tb26.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>buyo <cell>(betel nut), <cell lang=war><hi>pala</hi>buyó<hi>an</hi> <cell>(applied to the wine of cocoanut, that resembles the taste of the betel nut)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>biráu <cell>(a plant), <cell lang=war><hi>pala</hi>birau<hi>án</hi> <cell>(applied to the fruit of cocoanut that resembles the color of <hi>biráu</hi>)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>camote <cell>(sweet potato), <cell lang=war><hi>pala</hi>camoti<hi>án</hi> <cell>(applied to the fruit of &ldquo;nan&gtilde;ca&rdquo; (a tree) that resembles the color of <hi>camote</hi>)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>gátas <cell>(milk) <cell lang=war><hi>pala</hi>gatás<hi>an</hi> <cell>(applied to the young rice or corn whose grain is yet liquid resembling the milk)
</table>

<p><hi>Tag</hi> conveys the idea of ownership or authorship. It is simply added to the primitive. As

<table id=tb26.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>baláy <cell>(house)<corr>,</corr> <cell lang=war>tagbaláy <cell>(owner of a house)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>sugò <cell>(order), <cell lang=war>tagsugò <cell>(author of an order).
</table>

<p>It is sometimes used to indicate distribution, and then it is frequently combined with the prefix <hi lang=war>ma</hi> preceding it. As

<table id=tb26.3>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>túig <cell>(year), <cell lang=war><hi>tag</hi>tuig <cell>(year by year)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>ádlao <cell>(day), <cell lang=war>matag-ádlao <cell>(every day).
</table>

<p>These last particles are sometimes replaced by <hi>iquina</hi> which expresses<corr sic="," resp=errata></corr> the same idea. As

<table id=tb26.4>
    <row><cell>from <cell cols=2>túig, adlao, búlan (month), pagcáon (meal)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war><hi>iquina</hi>túig <cell>(every year)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war><hi>iquina</hi>adlao <cell>(every day)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war><hi>iquina</hi>bulan <cell>(every month)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war><hi>iquina</hi>pagcáon, <cell>(every meal)
</table>

<pb id=pb27 n=27><p>The interfix <hi>r</hi>, which bears no particular meaning, is here employed under the same rules as those established for its use in the figurative and verbal nouns.

<p>The interfix <hi>in</hi> expresses imitation. It is added at the beginning of the primitive if the latter commences with a vowel. Otherwise, it is placed before the first vowel of the primitive. As,


<table id=tb27.1>
<row><cell>from <cell>Súlug<note n=1>So we say <hi>dolúo-ha-Sulúg</hi>, which means a medicinal plant (<hi>duláo</hi>) from (<hi>ha</hi>) Sulu (<hi>Sulúg</hi>).</note> (the archipelago of Súlu),
<row><cell>     <cell>s<hi>in</hi>ulúg (a fight or dance after the Suluan fashion)
<row><cell>from <cell>tuyáo (crazy),
<row><cell>     <cell>t<hi>in</hi>uyáo (foolishness)
<row><cell>from <cell>ínsic (chinaman),
<row><cell>     <cell>i<hi>ni</hi>nsic (chinese language; ways; or habit).
</table>


<p><hi>An</hi> and <hi>on</hi> among the derivatives, signify the idea of abundance or participation, <hi>an</hi> frequently conveying the idea of place. Both are appended to the primitive without any other particle, and complemented with an <hi>h</hi>, in the same way as in the formation of verbals.<note n=2>See &ldquo;<hi>an, on</hi>&rdquo; under the heading of &ldquo;Verbal&rdquo;, page 15 <hi>supra</hi>.</note> Examples:

<table id=tb27.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell>pálad <cell>(fate), <cell>paláran<note n=3>From <hi>paladan</hi>, the <hi>d</hi> having been solved into <hi>r</hi>.</note> <cell>(fortunate),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>asáua <cell>(wife), <cell>asauá<hi>han</hi> <cell>(married man),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>salapi <cell>(silver, money), <cell>salapi<hi>an</hi> <cell>(wealthy)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>curi <cell>(difficulty), <cell>curi<hi>án</hi> <cell>(stubborn person)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>sumat <cell>(information), <cell>sumatán <cell>(credulous)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>burabud <cell>(fountain), <cell>burabur<hi>on</hi><note n=4>It is believed that the name of one of the towns of Leyte, called by the Spaniards &ldquo;Burauen&rdquo; and, by the natives, &ldquo;Burauón&rdquo;, has been originated from <hi>burabáron</hi> (Contracted and made <hi>Burauón</hi>), on account of the fact that there are many fountains in that place. There is no reason why the native name &ldquo;Burauón&rdquo; used by the natives until the present time should not be employed for all uses, the <hi>u</hi> of said word being replaced by the <hi>w</hi>, if the letters proposed in the note of the first page of this book are adopted.</note> <cell>(place where there are many fountains)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>taro <cell>(wax), <cell>taró<hi>hon</hi> <cell>(an object that has wax on)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>tubac <cell>(ant)<corr sic=";">,</corr> <cell>tubac<hi>ón</hi> <cell>(a thing that has ants on.)
</table>

<pb id=pb28 n=28><p>These particles are sometimes employed jointly, the <hi>an</hi> preceding the <hi>on</hi>. This compound affix, <hi>anon</hi>, bears the idea of great abundance, or birth or residence place, and is preceeded by an <hi>h</hi> according to the same rules established for <hi>an</hi> and <hi>on</hi>. Examples:

<table id=tb28.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell>man&gtilde;gad   <cell>(wealth)<corr sic=.>,</corr>             <cell>man&gtilde;gár<hi>an</hi> <cell>(wealthy), manggar<hi>án</hi>on (rich).
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>abacá            <cell>(hemp),               <cell>abacá<hi>han</hi> <cell>(person that has hemp), abaca<hi>hànon</hi> (person that owns much hemp),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Tan-auan         <cell>(a town so called),   <cell>tan-auan<hi>anon</hi> <cell>(native or resident of Tanauan).
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Palo             <cell>(a town so called),   <cell>palo<hi>ánon</hi> contracted <hi>palon&apos;on</hi> <cell>(native or resident of Palo),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Tolosa           <cell>(a town),             <cell>tolosa<hi>hanon</hi>, contracted <hi>tolosán&apos;hon</hi> <cell>(native or resident of Tolosa),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Dagami           <cell>(a town),             <cell>dagami<hi>ánon</hi>, contracted <hi>dagamin&apos;on</hi> <cell>(native or resident of Dagami),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Maasin           <cell>(a town),             <cell>maasin<hi>ánon</hi>, contracted <hi>maasinhon</hi><note n=1>This word does not follow the rule. For phonetical reasons, in its formation an <hi>h</hi> is used and it is made <hi>maasinhanon</hi> contracted <hi>maasinhon</hi> instead of <hi>maasinánon</hi> which is the regular form.</note> <cell>(native or resident of Maasin),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Sugbu            <cell>(Cebú),               <cell>sugbu<hi>ánon</hi>, <cell>(native or resident of Cebú),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Samar            <cell>(province so called), <cell>samaránon, contracted <hi>samárnon</hi> <cell>(native or resident of Sámar),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>Manila           <cell>(Manila),             <cell>manila<hi>anon</hi>, contracted <hi>manilan&apos;on</hi> <cell>(native or resident of Manila).
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from> ,, </seg> <cell>America          <cell>(America),            <cell>america<hi>hanon</hi>, contracted <hi>americanhon</hi><note n=2>The natives, especially the low people pronounce   <hi>Mericá</hi> instead of <hi>America; mericano</hi> instead of the Spanish &ldquo;<hi>americano</hi>&rdquo; for <hi>American</hi>.</note> <cell>(<corr sic=american>American</corr>).
</table>


<p>OBSERVATIONS. There are other forms of derivatives, viz: <hi>ca cat iquina</hi> or <hi>quina, taga, tagum</hi> or <hi>tagun, hi.</hi>

<p><hi>Ca</hi> means also company, as from tupad (to be side by side) catúpad (the person side by side).

<pb id=pb29 n=29><p><hi>Cat</hi> means season, as from &ldquo;áni&rdquo; (harvest), &ldquo;cat-aní&rdquo; (harvest time).

<p><hi>Iquina</hi> or <hi>quina</hi> expresses nature, as from &ldquo;táuo&rdquo; (man), &ldquo;buhi&rdquo; (alive), &ldquo;iquinatáuo&rdquo; (property peculiar to men), &ldquo;quinabuhi&rdquo; (life).

<p><hi>Taga</hi>, means origin or residence, posession, or measure, as from &ldquo;Leyte&rdquo; (Island so called), &ldquo;súndan&gtilde;&rdquo; (bolo), &ldquo;íroc&rdquo; (armpits), we have: &ldquo;taga Leyte&rdquo; (from Leyte), &ldquo;tagasúndang&rdquo; (one who bears a bolo), &ldquo;tagairoc&rdquo; (up to the armpits). When this particle <hi>taga</hi> means measure, it is sometimes replaced by <hi>pa</hi>, as from &ldquo;háuac&rdquo; (belly), &ldquo;paháuác&rdquo; (up to the belly).

<p><hi>Tagum</hi> expresses the idea of power, virtue, or peculiarity. When the primitive commences with <hi>n</hi>, the <hi>m</hi> of <hi>tagum</hi> is suppressed. When the primitive begins with a consonant not labial, the said <hi>m</hi> is replaced by <hi>n</hi>. It is sometimes combined with the affix <hi>an</hi>, As: from &ldquo;matá&rdquo; (eye) &ldquo;baba&rdquo; (mouth), &ldquo;lipong&rdquo; (confusion), we have &ldquo;tagumatá&rdquo; (peculiar disease of the eye), &ldquo;tagumbabáan&rdquo; (person whose words have a peculiar power or virtue), &ldquo;tagunlipón&gtilde;an&rdquo; (one who has the power to make himself invisible).

<p><hi>Hi</hi> is also combined with the interfix <hi>r</hi> and the affix <hi>an</hi>, as from &ldquo;polós&rdquo; (profit), &ldquo;himorólsan&rdquo; (profitable). Among verbs <hi>ha</hi> is used instead of <hi>hi</hi>, as from &ldquo;cáon&rdquo; (to eat), &ldquo;hacaraón&rdquo; (eatable).

    <q rend=block><p>NOTE.&mdash;The past participles take sometimes the affix <hi>an</hi>, as

    <table id=tb29.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell>cauil <cell>(fish-hook), <cell>quinauilán <cell>(fish caught with &ldquo;cauil&rdquo;)
    <row><cell>     <cell>bitánà <cell>(a kind of fishing net)<corr>,</corr> <cell>binitanáan <cell>(fish caught with &ldquo;bitanà&rdquo;).
    </table></q>

<p>There are other transformative particles not so important as those already mentioned, and which the use will show to the student.




<div3 id=ch2.1.2.6>
<head>PROPER AND COMMON</head>

<p>Like in other tongues there is in Bisayan a distinction between proper and common nouns.  <hi>Tacloban</hi>, <hi>Catbalaógan, <pb id=pb30 n=30>Ilon&gtilde;-ílon&gtilde;</hi> (Iloilo), <hi>Espanya</hi> (Spain), <hi>Pedro</hi> (Peter), <hi>Guillermo</hi> (William), etc., are proper nouns; <hi>bucad</hi> (flower), <hi>bató</hi> (stone), <hi>áyam</hi> (dog), etc., are common.

<p>The Bisayan language has also familiar names for persons. As

<table>
    <row><cell><seg id=of>of</seg> Pedro, <cell>Péndon&gtilde;, Endon&gtilde;, Edón&gtilde;, Edós, Pedó, etc;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Juan, <cell>Uáuan&gtilde;, Uauay, Uáuà, Uuán, Uuâ, etc;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Vicente, <cell>Tenten&gtilde;, Titín&gtilde;, Sente, Setée, etc;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Rafael, <cell>Pápen&gtilde;, Paén&gtilde;, Paél, Pápè, etc;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Margarito, <cell>Titon&gtilde;, Iton&gtilde;, Titoy, Itoy, etc.;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Francisco, <cell>Quicoy, Incoy, Quicò, etc;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Juana, <cell>Uánday, Uáday, etc.;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Antonio, <cell>Tónyo, Todóc, etc.;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Alejandro, <cell>Andon&gtilde;, Andoy, etc.;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Isabel, <cell>Sabel, etc.;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Gregorío, <cell>Goyón&gtilde;, etc.;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Saturnino, <cell>Satúr, etc.;
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=of>,,</seg> Claudia, <cell>Calán, etc.
</table>

<p>Among the names of places, there are a few formed by the preposition <hi>can</hi> (which means possession or property), and the particles <hi>ca</hi> (which denotes abundance), and <hi>guin</hi> (which conveys the idea of past passive action), as

<table>
    <row><cell>Cansámqui <cell>(a place, which probably belonged formerly to one named <hi>Samqui</hi>)
    <row><cell>Can-orquin <cell>(place probably owned formerly by one called <hi>Orquin</hi>)
    <row><cell>Canramos,<note n=A><p>The <corr sic=names resp=errata>name</corr> <hi>Calyarâ</hi> (native name of the town of Carigara, Leyte) has been probably originated from <hi>Cangara</hi> (placed of one called <hi>Garâ</hi>). A similar explanation might be given for the formation of the names <hi>Calbigà</hi> and <hi>Calbáyog</hi> (towns of Sámar).

    <p>Besides the particle <hi>can</hi> the pronoun <hi>hira</hi> was probably used for similar cases. We think that the word <hi>Hiraite</hi> (Bisayan name of the word <hi>Leyte</hi>, applied to a town of the island of the same name) is formed by the said pronoun <hi>hirá</hi> and <hi>Ite.</hi> probably the name of the ancient owners of that place.</note> <cell>transformed Carrámos (place probably owned or possessed in former times by one named <hi>Ramos</hi>)
    <pb id=pb31 n=31><row><cell>Cabuyúan <cell>(place where formerly there was much &ldquo;buyu&rdquo; (betelnut)<corr>)</corr>
    <row><cell>Cabalían <cell>(place where the strong current of the sea breaks the oars (balì)<corr>)</corr>
    <row><cell>Guintiguían <cell>(place in the &ldquo;San Juanico strait,&rdquo; where the strong current of the sea <corr sic=tastes resp=errata>tests</corr> the rowers (tigui)<corr>)</corr>
    <row><cell>Guintúlyan <cell>(a place in Basáy, Samar, where probably many fishes were caught (tulúy) with nets.<corr>)</corr>
    <row><cell> <cell>Etc.
</table>


    <q rend=block><p>NOTE.&mdash;The names of persons among the Bisayan people are all Christian at the present time. Many of the surnames are Spanish, many others being of Bisayan origin as Lágbas, Pócpoc, Macasáit, Cabaobao, Balasbas, Yagomyom, etc.</q>


<p>To indicate relationship, as the English <hi>papa, mamma</hi>, and respect, confidence, or tenderness, there are a number of Bisayan nouns, which show by themselves the relation between the speaker or writer and the person to whom the noun is applied. Examples:


<list>
    <item>for <hi>papa</hi>, tátay or tatáy, tátan&gtilde; or tatán&gtilde;, itáy, or itán&gtilde;;
    <item><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <hi>mamma</hi>, nánay or nanáy, nánan&gtilde; or nanán&gtilde;, ináy, or inán&gtilde;.
</list>


<p>There are others applied to grandfathers and grandmothers, and also to those persons who act or are considered as fathers or mothers. Examples:

<list>
    <item>Mano, manóng, mamo, mamoy, babay, dudoy, dudù inco, tutoy, yuyu, iyô (applied to elder brothers, uncles or elder male relatives of any degree, even to persons not related to but respected by the speaker or writer).
    <item>Mana<note n=A><hi>Mano</hi> and <hi>mana</hi> are probably a corruption of the Spanish &ldquo;<hi>hermano</hi>,&rdquo; &ldquo;<hi>hermana</hi>.&rdquo;</note> manang, manáy, mama, mamay. manding, duday, duda, insi tutay, yuya, tuta (applied to elder sisters, aunts or elder female relatives of any <pb id=pb32 n=32>degree, even to women not related to, but respected by the speaker or writer).
    <item>Tío, or tí, tia or tí (applied as á form of politeness and respect, respectively to men or women not related to or unknown by the speaker or writer).
    <item>Idoy, íntoy, budóy, busóy, and idáy, inday, udáy, idíng, iyíng, bididay, nonay, neneng, (applied with tenderness to boys or girls respectively).
</list>


<p>NOTE.&mdash;The word <hi lang=war>cuán</hi> (so and so), not meaning anything by itself, is applied to persons or things whose names the speaker or writer does not know, or venture, or wish to express. As the phrase &ldquo;so and so&rdquo;, it helps a great deal in a conversation, and is used also instead of the verbs and other parts of speech.


<p>The words <hi lang=war>inín</hi> (contracted of <hi lang=war>iní nga</hi>) and <hi lang=war>adâ</hi> (I guess, perhaps) are also used in the conversation, as auxiliary particles, they being then equivalent to the English <hi>why</hi>.


<p>Examples:

<list>
    <item>Question.&mdash;&ldquo;<foreign lang=war>¿Guinsorat mo na an balos?</foreign>&rdquo; (Have you already written the answer?)
    <item>Answer.&mdash;&ldquo;<foreign lang=war>Oo guincoan co na gad</foreign>&rdquo; (Yes I already have).
    <item>Q.&mdash;<foreign lang=war>¿Háin an basahón?</foreign> (Where is the book?)
    <item>A.&mdash;<foreign lang=war>Inin ... aadto ada ha ac solód</foreign> (why ... I guess it is in my room)
    <item>Q.&mdash;<foreign lang=war>Mapiráu, ¿ano in bubuhaton co?</foreign> (I am sleepy, what shall I do?)
    <item>A.&mdash;<foreign lang=war>Ada ... catúrog</foreign> (Why ... to sleep).
</list>




<div3 id=ch2.1.2.7>
<head>POSITIVE, COMPARATIVE, AND SUPERLATIVE.</head>

<p>As in other languages, there are three degrees for <corr sic=adjetives resp=errata>adjectives</corr>, also used for substantives in Bisayan. These degrees are <hi>positive, comparative</hi> and <hi>superlative</hi>.

<p>Nothing particular needs be observed about the positive degree, except what is mentioned in the foregoing paragraphs:

<pb id=pb33 n=33><p>The comparatives are formed exactly in the same way as the figuratives<note n=1>See page 12 <hi>et seq.</hi> of this book.</note>, the number of syllables being disregarded, as if all has more than two syllables.


<table id=tb33.1>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell><seg>from</seg>   <cell lang=war>hatáas <cell>(high),        <cell lang=war><hi>haro</hi>hataás <cell>(higher),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>hobóg  <cell>(intoxicated), <cell lang=war><hi>horo</hi>hobóg  <cell>(more intoxicated),
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>táuo   <cell>(man),         <cell lang=war><hi>taro</hi>tauó   <cell>(more of a man).
</table>


<p>In the formation of adjectives prefixed with <hi lang=war>ma</hi>, this particle is preferably disregarded, as if such particle did not exist, as

<table id=tb33.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from                      <cell lang=war>maópay <cell>(good)<corr>,</corr> <cell lang=war>ma<hi>o</hi>r<hi>o</hi>opáy <cell>(better)
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>magbuság <cell>(white), <cell lang=war>ma<hi>boro</hi>boság <cell>(whiter), etc.
</table>

<p>There is another form of comparative consisting in the use of the combined particles <hi>labi</hi> (more) and <hi>ca</hi>, as

<table id=tb33.3>
    <row><cell lang=war>labí ca maopay   <cell>(better),
    <row><cell lang=war>labí ca mabusag  <cell>(whiter).
</table>

<p>This last form is sometimes used for superlatives.

<p>The superlatives are of three classes:

<p>Those which do not admit any comparison, and which we call absolute or supreme superlatives, as

<table id=tb33.4>
    <row><cell lang=war>guimaopáyi <cell>(the best of all);
</table>

<p rend=noindent>those which are not so absolute, and which we call ordinary superlative, as,

<table id=tb33.5>
<row><cell lang=war>capín ca maópay <cell rows=3>}<cell rows=3 rend=vam>(very good);
<row><cell lang=war>maopay nga capín
<row><cell lang=war>maopay hin sogón&gtilde;<note n=2 lang=en>The word <hi lang=war>capin sogóng, uraura,</hi> in some localities are replaced by the Spanish word <hi>duro</hi> (hard). So they say &ldquo;<hi lang=war>duro ca maopay&rdquo;, maópay n&gtilde;a duro,</hi> or <hi lang=war>maopay hin duro</hi> (very good). It is proper to adopt foreign words when there are not words coresponding in Bisayan, but we do not see why the pure Bisayan words should be forgotten when they are expressive, pure and original. The preposition <hi lang=war>cundí</hi> (but) is suffering the same fate, by the introduction of the Spanish <hi lang=es>pero</hi>.</note>
</table>

<p>and those which convey the idea of excess, and which we call excessive superlatives, as

<pb id=pb34 n=34>
<table id=tb34.1>
<row><cell lang=war>uraúra<note n=1 lang=en>Instead of <hi lang=war>uraura</hi>, the word <hi lang=war>masiado</hi>, a corruption of the Spanish <hi lang=es>demasiado</hi>, is much in use. Read the preceeding note.</note> ca maópay <cell rows=2>}<cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to good).
<row><cell lang=war>maópay n&gtilde;a uraúra
</table>

<p>As is seen from the preceding examples, the supreme supertive is formed by adding to the beginning of the primitive the prefix <hi>gui</hi> and by appending to said primitive the affíx <hi>i</hi>. The first syllable of the primitive may be doubled as use permits. As,

<table>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>hatáas <cell>(high, tall), <cell lang=war>guihataási, or guihahataasi <cell>(the highest)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>táuo   <cell>(man),        <cell lang=war>guitáu&apos;i <cell>(a true and perfect man).
</table>

<p>The first form is also adopted for the substantives to show the highest degree of identity as in this phrase:

<list>
    <item><hi lang=war>An guiaamáyi mo gud an natauág ha imo</hi>
    <item>(It is your <hi>very</hi> father who calls you).
</list>

<p>The ordinary superlative is formed with the particles <hi lang=war>capin ca</hi> or <hi lang=war>labí ca</hi> placed before the primitive, or with the particles <hi lang=war>caópay, n&gtilde;a capin,</hi> or <hi lang=war>hin sogon&gtilde;</hi> put after the primitive. As,

<table id=tb34.2>
    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war cols=2>mabido            <cell>(<corr sic=very>sorry</corr>)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>capín ca mabidò   <cell rows=5>} <cell rows=5 rend=vam>(very sorry)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>labí ca mabidò
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>mabidò caopay
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>mabidò n&gtilde;a capín
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>mabidò hin sogón&gtilde;
</table>

<p>Some of the adjectives formed with particle <hi lang=war>ma</hi>, have another form for ordinary superlative, in doubling their root and disregarding the prefix <hi lang=war>ma</hi>, as from &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>masiróm</foreign>&rdquo; (dark), &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>masiromsiróm</foreign>&rdquo;<note n=2>It must be noted that the accent in the superlative is on the last syllable, <hi lang=war>masiromstróm</hi>, while in the dimunitive (which has exactly the same form, except the accent) the accent is upon the pennit, <hi lang=war>masiromsírom</hi>. The meaning is different in the phrases <hi lang=war>masiromsírom pa</hi>, and <hi lang=war><corr sic="masiromsírom">masiromsiróm</corr> pa</hi>; the first means &ldquo;it is a dark yet&rdquo;; the second &ldquo;it is very dark yet&rdquo;.</note> (very dark).

<p>The <corr sic=excesive resp=errata>excessive</corr> superlative is formed with the particle <pb id=pb35 n=35><hi lang=war>uraúra ca</hi> placed before <corr resp=errata>the </corr>primitive, or the particle <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a uraúra</hi> located after the root. As,

<table id=tb35.1>
    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war cols=2>maasín                    <cell>(salty)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>uraúra ca maasín          <cell rows=2>} <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(excessively salty)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>maasín n&gtilde;a uraúra
</table>

<p>The idea of the excessive superlative is also expressed sometimes with the particles &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>lapás ca</foreign>&rdquo; (excessively), or with the phrase &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>dirí sonô hin ca</foreign>&rdquo; or &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>dirì socól hin ca</foreign>&rdquo; (out of measure), placed before the primitive, as

<list lang=war>
    <item>lapás ca maasín
    <item>dirì sonô hin ca maasín
    <item>dirì socól hin ca maasín.
</list>

<p>NOTE.&mdash;The particles &ldquo;labi&rdquo; and &ldquo;capin&rdquo; take sometimes the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi>, as


<table id=tb35.2>
<row>
    <cell>from <cell lang=war>mahúsay                        <cell>(orderly, beautiful),
<row>
    <cell>     <cell lang=war>labínan ca mahúsay             <cell>(very beautiful);
<row>
    <cell>from <cell lang=war>masáquit                       <cell>(<corr sic=paintful resp=errata>painful</corr>)<corr>,</corr>
<row>
    <cell>     <cell lang=war>masáquit n&gtilde;a capínan    <cell>(very <corr sic="paintful(">painful)</corr>.
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.2.8>
<head>CARDINAL, ORDINAL, PARTITIVE, AND DISTRIBUTIVE.</head>

<p>The cardinal adjectives are the following:

<table id=tb35.3>
    <row><cell>usá, contracted <hi>us</hi>, <cell>(one)
    <row><cell>duhá <cell>(two)
    <row><cell>tuló <cell>(three)
    <row><cell>upát <cell>(four)
    <row><cell>limá <cell>(five)
    <row><cell>unóm <cell>(six)
    <row><cell>pitó <cell>(seven)
    <row><cell>ualó <cell>(eight)
    <row><cell>siyám <cell>(nine)
    <row><cell>napulò<note n=A>The Bisayan cardinal show that the original system of Bisayan people in counting was the decimal. So <hi>napulo</hi> is a compound word from <hi>na</hi> (made) and <hi>pulò</hi> (pile, island). <hi>Napulo</hi> means &ldquo;one pile made&rdquo;, wherefrom the decimal system clearly shows.</note> <cell>(ten)
    <pb id=pb36 n=36><row><cell>napulo cag<note n=1><p>This word <hi>cag</hi> (and) is used in the island of Panay, but not in Sámar or Leyte where <hi>ngan, ug</hi> are employed for the said conjunction.

    <p>In the southern part of Leyte it is said: <hi>napala ug osá</hi>.</note> usá <cell>(eleven).
    <row><cell>caruhaán<note n=2>A collective noun formed by the prefix <hi>ca</hi> and the primitive <hi>duha</hi> whose <hi>d</hi> is transformed into <hi>r</hi>, and by the affix <hi>an</hi>. It means the reunion of two piles.</note> <cell>(twenty)
    <row><cell>catloán <cell>(thirty)
    <row><cell>cap&apos;atán <cell>(forty)
    <row><cell>calim&apos;an <cell>(fifty)
    <row><cell>caúnman <cell>(sixty)
    <row><cell>capitoán <cell>(seventy)
    <row><cell>caualoán <cell>(eighty)
    <row><cell>casiyamán <cell>(ninety)
    <row><cell>usá ca gatós <cell>(one hundred)
    <row><cell>duhá ca gatós <cell>(two hundred)
    <row><cell>usá ca yocót <cell>(one thousand)
    <row><cell>usá ca ríbo<note n=3>There seems to be no doubt that this word <hi>ribo</hi> has the same origin as the Tagalog &ldquo;libo&rdquo;; but each one has a different meaning: while the Bisayan <hi>libo</hi> means <hi>ten thousand</hi>, the Tagalog <hi lang=tl>libo</hi> means only <hi>one thousand</hi>. To express <hi>ten thousand</hi>, the Tagalogs have the word <hi lang=tl>lacsá</hi>.</note> <cell>(ten thousand)
    <row><cell>usá cagatós ca ribo <cell>(one million), etc.
</table>


<p>As it is noticed above, the cardinals are formed by the preposition &ldquo;cag&rdquo; (and), the prefix &ldquo;ca&rdquo; (which means collection) and the affix &ldquo;an&rdquo;, added to the primitives &ldquo;usá, duhá, tuló, upáo, lima, unóm, pitó, ualó, siyám, napulo, gatós, yocót, ribo&rdquo;, the phonetical reasons being taken in consideration. Thus we say:


<list>
    <item>caruhaán, not caduhaán,
    <item>catloan, not catuloán,
    <item>cap&apos;atán not caupatán,
    <item>calim&apos;an not calimahán,
    <item>caúnman, not caunoman.
</list>


<p>The word &ldquo;usa&rdquo; is frequently contracted, especially in familiar language, by the supression of the last vowel. Thus:


<table id=tb36.1>
    <row><cell><hi>us</hi> ca gatos <cell rows=3>} <cell rows=3 rend=vam><corr sic=insted resp=errata>instead</corr> of &ldquo;usá&rdquo; ca etc.
    <row><cell><hi>us</hi> ca yocót
    <row><cell><hi>us</hi> ca ribo
</table>


<pb id=pb37 n=37><p>In reading the numbers, the English way is followed, the particles &ldquo;uga may&rdquo; being sometimes employed especially in cases of large amounts. Thus, to read this number

<p rend=example>987654321,

<p  rend=example>we would say:

<p lang=war>&ldquo;Casiyamán cag ualó cayocót, pitó cagatós caúnman cag limá caribo, n&gtilde;a may upát ca yocót, tuló ca gatós caruhaán cag usá.&rdquo;

<p>NOTE&mdash;In Bisayan, there is no word corresponding to the English <hi>zero</hi> (0). However, its figure is used in Bisayan. It is suggested that the word &ldquo;lun&gtilde;ág&rdquo; (empty), or &ldquo;uaráy&rdquo; (nothing) be adopted as corresponding to the word &ldquo;zero&rdquo; which is derived from modern Latin <hi>zephiram</hi> from Arabic <hi>cafrun, cifrun</hi> or <hi>sefer</hi> (empty).

<p>The ordinals are formed by employing the particles &ldquo;ica&rdquo; (which bears the idea of order), placed before the cardinal. As


<list lang=war>
    <item>ica usá,
    <item>ica napulò
    <item>ica calim&apos;an
    <item>ica upat ca gatós
    <item>ica siyam ca yucót
    <item>icá pito ca ribo.
</list>


<p>The ordinal of <hi lang=war>usa</hi> has also simple forms, as <hi lang=war>siyahan, siyapá,</hi> and frequently admits the particle <hi lang=war>icag</hi> instead of <hi lang=war>ica</hi>, as <hi lang=war>icag usá</hi>.

<p>The partitives have exactly the same form, as the ordinals, except in that the ordinals <hi lang=war>cag usa, siyahan</hi> and <hi lang=war>siyapá</hi> are never used as partitives; <corr sic="that and">and that</corr> there is the form <hi lang=war>tun&gtilde;â</hi> and its variants <hi lang=war>catun&gtilde;â, tun&gtilde;â</hi> or <hi lang=war>catun&gtilde;â hin</hi> or <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi> (half), employed instead of <hi lang=war>icaduhà</hi>.

<p>The phrase <hi lang=war>ca bahín</hi> (part) is frequently used in the partitives to avoid confusion. Thus


<pb id=pb38 n=38><table id=tb38.1>
    <row><cell lang=war>an icaupát ca bahín <cell>(the fourth part)
</table>


<p>The particle <hi lang=war>ica</hi> is sometimes contracted into <hi lang=war>ca</hi>as &ldquo;catun&gtilde;a&rdquo; (half), &ldquo;cauróg&rdquo; (most).

<p>The distributives are formed by adding to the cardinals the particle <hi lang=war>tag</hi> (which conveys the idea of distribution). As

<table id=tb38.2>
    <row><cell lang=war>tag dúha <cell>(two, each)
    <row><cell lang=war>tag caualóan <cell>(eighty, each)
    <row><cell lang=war>tag yúcot <cell>(thousand, each)
</table>

<p>When the distributive bears the meaning of portion, the particle <hi lang=war>iquina</hi> is combined with <hi lang=war>tag</hi>. As

<table id=tb38.3>
    <row><cell lang=war>iquina tag duha <cell>(each two), etc.
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.2.9>
<head>COLLECTIVE</head>

<p>The collective nouns are formed by adding at the beginning of the primitive <corr sic=te resp=errata>the</corr> prefix <hi>ca</hi> (which bears the idea of collection or reunion) and the affix <hi>an</hi>. As,


<table id=tb38.4>
    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>bata <cell>(boy or girl), <cell lang=war><corr sic="cabataán" resp=errata>cabatáan</corr>  <cell>(reunion of boys or girls)
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war><corr sic="táwo">táuo</corr> <cell>(person),      <cell lang=war>catauóhan <cell>(reunion of persons).
    <row><cell>     <cell lang=war>duhá <cell>(two),         <cell lang=war>caruhaán  <cell>(twenty).
</table>


<p>These forms are very frequently used <corr sic=ty resp=errata>to</corr> make the plural of the nouns, as of the singular <hi>batá</hi> we make the plural.

<table id=tb38.5>
    <row><cell><foreign lang=war>mga batà</foreign> or <foreign lang=war>cabataan</foreign>.
</table>

<p>NOTE&mdash;The particle <hi lang=war>ca</hi> is also employed to express abstract ideas, as

<table id=tb38.6>
    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>buság <cell>(white color), <cell lang=war>mabuság <cell>(white), <cell lang=war>camabuság <cell>(whiteness)
</table>

<p>The particle <hi lang=war>pag</hi> is sometimes added at the beginning of the particle, as

<table id=tb38.7>
    <row><cell lang=war>pagcamabuság <cell>(whiteness).
</table>

<p>The collectives take also the form of the figuratives with or without the particles <hi>ca</hi> and <hi>an</hi>, as the use may permit, as


<pb id=pb39 n=39><table id=tb39.1 lang=war>
    <row><cell>caborobon&gtilde;tóhan,
    <row><cell>borobón&gtilde;to.
</table>


<p>NOTE.&mdash;There is another class of nouns which may be called <corr sic=despective resp=errata>depreciative</corr>. They are limited in number. The following belong to such class:

<p>for batà (child),

<list>
    <item>nagbobóto (a being born <corr sic=tru resp=errata>thru</corr> an explosion)
    <item>lumátud (person of big abdomen)
    <item>lugtuc,<note n=1>This word may have been derived from <hi>lagtuc</hi> which means the swelling of a thing due to dampness, humidity, or water.</note>
    <item>motatô<note n=2>An <corr sic=onomatopic resp=errata>onomatopoetic</corr> word bearing the idea of <corr sic=parvity resp=errata>littleness</corr>.</note>
    <item>motó, from botó (report of a gun, explosion);
</list>

<p>for anác (son or daughter)

<list>
    <item>nahólbot <corr>(</corr>past participle of &ldquo;hólbot&rdquo; to pull out of a hole<corr>)</corr>;
</list>

<p>for baba (mouth)

<list>
    <item>nasárag (of &ldquo;sárag&rdquo; to put something in the mouth);
</list>

<p>for camót (hand)

<list>
    <item>camrauón (from &ldquo;cámram&rdquo;, what an eagle does with its fingers);
</list>

<p>for tiil (foot)

<list>
    <item>sincádol<note n=3>An <corr sic=onomatopic resp=errata>onomatopoetic</corr> word meaning a thing that makes noise (caradul).</note> etc.
</list>

<p>There are despectives derived from their primitives, as,

<list>
    <item>for húbya (lazy), &ldquo;húbsac&rdquo;<note n=4>As it will be seen later there are despective verbs, as; of <hi lang=war>lacat</hi> (to walk) <hi lang=war>laag</hi>; of <hi lang=war>yacán</hi> (to talk), <hi lang=war>yaquimbot</hi>.</note>
</list>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>The <corr sic=voriations resp=errata>variations</corr> to which the Bisayan names are subject, are: gender, number, and cases.



<pb id=pb40 n=40>
<div3 id=ch2.1.2.10>
<head>Gender.</head>

<p>The gender is scarcely regarded. We have however for few nouns the natural and grammatical genders.

<p>Examples of natural gender:


<table id=tb40.1>
    <row role=label rend=center><cell cols=2>MASCULINE        <cell cols=2><corr sic=FEMENINE resp=errata>FEMININE</corr>
    <row><cell lang=war>laláqui <cell>(male person)        <cell lang=war>babaye <cell>(woman)
    <row><cell lang=war>lalaquí <cell>(male not person)    <cell lang=war>babayé <cell>(female not person)
    <row><cell lang=war>amay <cell>(father)                <cell lang=war>iróy <cell>(mother)
    <row><cell lang=war>bána <cell>(husband)               <cell lang=war>asáua <cell>(wife)
    <row><cell lang=war>bata <cell>(uncle)                 <cell lang=war>dadâ <cell>(aunt)
    <row><cell lang=war>baylo <cell>(brother in law)       <cell lang=war>hipág <cell>(sister in law), etc.
</table>

<p>Examples of gramatical gender:

<table id=tb40.2>
    <row role=label rend=center><cell>MASCULINE                <cell>FEMININE
    <row><cell lang=war>dudoy<note n=1 lang=en>See page 31 of this book.</note>  <cell lang=war>duday
    <row><cell lang=war>tutoy                    <cell lang=war>tutay
    <row><cell lang=war>idoy                     <cell lang=war>iday
    <row><cell lang=war>intoy                    <cell lang=war>inday
    <row><cell lang=war>mano                     <cell lang=war>mana
    <row><cell lang=war>manoy                    <cell lang=war>manáy
    <row><cell lang=war>manong                   <cell lang=war>manang<note n=2 lang=en>These nouns are originated, in our opinion, from Spanish. See the note on pape 31. <hi>supra</hi>.</note>
    <row><cell lang=war>tío                      <cell lang=war>tía<note n=3 lang=en>We also believe that these nouns are Spanish.</note>, etc.
</table>


<div3 id=ch2.1.2.11>
<head>Number</head>

<p>The plural is determined by the particle <hi>mga</hi> or <corr sic=of resp=errata>by</corr> those for collectives as formerly seen<note n=4>See &ldquo;Collective,&rdquo; <hi>supra</hi>.</note>, or by the interfix <hi>g</hi> among the adjectives. Examples:

<list>
    <item>of táuo (man) &ldquo;m&gtilde;a táuo,&rdquo; or &ldquo;catauóhan&rdquo; (men),
    <item>of dacò (large), dagcò (large, plural).
    <pb id=pb41 n=41><item>of matam-is (sweet), magtam-is (sweet, plural),
    <item>of hatáas (high), hagtáas (high, plural).
</list>

<p>When the noun is preceded by numeral adjectives, the singular keeps its form, as

<list>
    <item>usá ca táuo (one man), napulò ca tauo (ten men),
    <item>usá n&gtilde;a baláy (one house), calim&apos;an n&gtilde;a baláy (fifty houses).
</list>

<p>Some adjectives do not admit the interfix <hi>g</hi>, for euphonical reason, as

<list>
    <item>of hubyà (lazy), m&gtilde;a hubya, not húgbyà, etc.
</list>



<div3 id=ch2.1.2.12>
<head>Case.</head>

<p>There is no <corr sic=inflexion resp=errata>inflection</corr> for Bisayan nouns to distinguish their different cases, as in Greek and Latin. The cases are determined by the prepositions and by variable parts of speech preceding the noun.


<div3 id=ch2.1.2.13>
<head>IMPORTANT OBSERVATION.</head>

<p>There are great many Bisayan nouns composed of the <corr sic="samet leters" resp=errata>same letters</corr>, but which have different meanings according to the accent they bear. Of these are the following:

<table id=tb41.1>
    <row><cell lang=war>anáy <cell>(she-hog),                <cell lang=war>ánay <cell>(before)
    <row><cell lang=war>apó <cell>(grandson or grand-daughter), <cell lang=war>ápò <cell>(a thing fully introduced)
    <row><cell lang=war>áyao <cell>(distributive possession), <cell lang=war>ayáo <cell>(no, imperative)
    <row><cell lang=war>bábà <cell>(mouth),                  <cell lang=war>babá <cell>(to carry a thing on the back)
    <row><cell lang=war>babáye <cell>(woman),                <cell lang=war>babayé <cell>(female not person)
    <row><cell lang=war>baga <cell>(red-hot coal or wood),   <cell lang=war>bága <cell>(lung), <foreign lang=war>bagá</foreign> (like)
    <row><cell lang=war>bálay <cell>(turn),                  <cell lang=war>baláy <cell>(house)
    <row><cell lang=war>bálod <cell>(a kind of dove),        <cell lang=war>balód <cell>(wave)
    <row><cell lang=war>bálos <cell>(return)<corr>,</corr>   <cell lang=war>balós <cell>(revenge)
    <row><cell lang=war>bánus <cell>(abundant, thick),       <cell lang=war>banús <cell>(to scrub)
    <row><cell lang=war>báran&gtilde; <cell>(an amulet),     <cell lang=war>baráng <cell>(knot)
    <pb id=pb42 n=42><row><cell lang=war>bayáo <cell>(brother-in-law), <cell lang=war>báyao <cell>(to lift up)
    <row><cell lang=war>bucád <cell>(flower),                <cell lang=war>búcad <cell>(to dig up)
    <row><cell lang=war>búhat <cell>(work),                  <cell lang=war>buhát <cell>(to raise)
    <row><cell lang=war>buhi <cell>(alive),                  <cell lang=war>buhi <cell>(losse)
    <row><cell lang=war>buláo <cell>(yellow),                <cell lang=war>búlao <cell>(to provoke a stranger)
    <row><cell lang=war>búrong<note n=1 lang=en>This is the origin of &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>Boron&gtilde;an</foreign>&rdquo; a town on the eastern coast of the island of Samar, on account of the fact that during certain epoch of the year, that place is more or less covered with fog.</note> <cell>(fog), <cell lang=war>buróng <cell>(to throw)
    <row><cell lang=war>busà <cell>(reprimand),              <cell lang=war>búsà <cell>(therefore)
    <row><cell lang=war>cóbal <cell>(thread),                <cell lang=war>cobál <cell>(corn, callosity)
    <row><cell lang=war>comót <cell>(sinked),                <cell lang=war>cómot <cell>(quick)
    <row><cell lang=war>dósol <cell>(pain of the stomack),   <cell lang=war>dosól <cell>(despective form of &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>cáon</foreign>&rdquo;, to eat)
    <row><cell lang=war>hóron <cell>(to pass the night),     <cell lang=war>horón <cell>(farm)
    <row><cell lang=war>igo, <cell>(just),                   <cell lang=war>igô <cell>(to be hit)
    <row><cell lang=war>lága <cell>(flame),                  <cell lang=war>lagà <cell>(cooked)
    <row><cell lang=war>láya <cell>(a net for fishing),      <cell lang=war>layà <cell>(to wither), <foreign lang=war>layâ</foreign> (withered)
    <row><cell lang=war>laláqui <cell>(man),                 <cell lang=war>lalaquí <cell>(male, not person)
    <row><cell lang=war>látos <cell>(reaching, overtaking),  <cell lang=war>latós <cell>(to whip)
    <row><cell lang=war>lúya <cell>(weakness),               <cell lang=war>luyà <cell>(lime), <foreign lang=war>luyâ</foreign> (restlessness), <foreign lang=war>luy-a</foreign> (<corr sic=zingiber resp=errata>ginger</corr>)
    <row><cell lang=war>muláy <cell>(play),                  <cell lang=war>múlay <cell>(to teach)
    <row><cell lang=war>obós <cell>(low),                    <cell lang=war>óbos <cell>(to exhaust)
    <row><cell lang=war>usá or usâ <cell>(one),              <cell lang=war>úsa <cell>(to marvel)
    <row><cell lang=war>úpa <cell>(reward),                  <cell lang=war>upá <cell>(rice chaff)
    <row><cell lang=war>pátag <cell>(plane),                 <cell lang=war>patág <cell>(a kind of basket)
    <row><cell lang=war>píli <cell>(a tree so called),       <cell lang=war>pilì <cell>(to select)
    <row><cell lang=war>pálad <cell>(palm),                  <cell lang=war>palád <cell>(a fish)
    <row><cell lang=war>pusò <cell>(flower of banana),       <cell lang=war>pusô <cell>(rice especially cooked)
    <row><cell lang=war>pusâ <cell>(pounded),                <cell lang=war>pusà <cell>(to wash the feet)
    <row><cell lang=war>púto <cell>(a dainty so called),     <cell lang=war>pútò <cell>(partition), <foreign lang=war>putó</foreign> (last son or daughter)
    <row><cell lang=war>sábot <cell>(agreement),             <cell lang=war>sabót <cell>(filement or to <corr sic=moderstand resp=errata>understand</corr>)
    <row><cell lang=war>sácay, <cell>(<corr sic=passanger resp=errata>passenger</corr> or companion on a boat), <cell lang=war>sacáy <cell>(to embark)
    <row><cell lang=war>sócot <cell>(frequent),              <cell lang=war>socót <cell>(to collect)
    <pb id=pb43 n=43><row><cell lang=war>súso <cell>(teat),  <cell lang=war>susò <cell>(thickset), <foreign lang=war>susô</foreign> (a mollusk so called)
    <row><cell lang=war>tíao <cell>(joke),                   <cell lang=war>tiáo <cell>(maniac)
    <row><cell lang=war>tíma <cell>(finished),               <cell lang=war>timá <cell>(uneven)
    <row><cell lang=war>túba <cell>(a plant so called),      <cell lang=war>tubâ <cell>(wine from cocoanut or nipa)
    <row><cell lang=war>tubó <cell>(sugar-cane),             <cell lang=war>túbò <cell>(to grow), etc.
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.2.14>
<head>Transposition of accents.</head>

<p>The accent of a word frequently changes its place upon its transformation.

<p>In the diminutives formed by repetition of the root or by the affix <hi lang=war>ay</hi>, the acute accent is always placed upon the penult. As

<table id=tb43.1>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

    <row><cell>from                      <cell lang=war>baláy,   <cell lang=war>balaybálay
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>saróual, <cell lang=war>sarouálay
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>balóto,  <cell lang=war>balotóhay.
</table>

<p>The grave accent of the root is preserved; and its angular accent becomes grave, which is preserved in its repetition. As

<table id=tb43.2>
    <column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell>from                      <cell lang=war>dacò, <cell>           <cell lang=war>dacòdácò <cell>
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>bohô  <cell>(hole),    <cell lang=war>bohòbóhò <cell>(little hole).
</table>

<p>When the primitive has the acute accent on its penult, said accent is transferred to the last syllable of the original primitive, the repeated primitive following the preceding rules. As.

<table id=tb43.3>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

    <row><cell>from                      <cell lang=war>dáhon,    <cell lang=war>dahóndáhon
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>cáhoy,    <cell lang=war>cahoycáhoy
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>halípot,  <cell lang=war>halipótay
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>maópáy,   <cell lang=war>maopay-ópay
    <row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>hatáas,   <cell lang=war>hataastáas
</table>

<p>In the figuratives, the same rules are followed; and when the interfix <hi lang=war>ro</hi> is employed, the primitive generally loses its acute accent which is placed upon the penult of the figurative. As

<table id=tb43.4>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

    <row><cell>from <cell lang=war>sacayán, <cell lang=war>sarosacáyan.
</table>

<pb id=pb44 n=44><p>In the verbal nouns, it is a general rule that when the verb root has its acute accent on its penult, its verbals have said accent trasplaced to their last syllables, and <hi>viceversa</hi>, as

<table id=tb44.1>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

<row><cell>from <cell><foreign lang=war>sarát</foreign>, (to write),        <cell>from <cell><foreign lang=war>bása</foreign> (to read)
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>parasúrat                 <cell>     <cell lang=war>parabasá
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>tigsúrat                  <cell>     <cell lang=war>tigbasá
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>magsusúrat                <cell>     <cell lang=war>magbarasá
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>susurátan                 <cell>     <cell lang=war>barasahán
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>susuráton                 <cell>     <cell lang=war>barasahón
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>masúrat                   <cell>     <cell lang=war>mabasá
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>isusúrat,                 <cell>     <cell lang=war>ibarasá;
</table>

<p rend="noindent">except when the transformative particle is <hi>ma</hi> meaning desirableness, in which case the acute accent is always on the last syllable; and also in case of the particle <hi>hi</hi>, where the accent is always put on the penult. As

<list lang=war>
    <item>masuratsurát,
    <item>himása.
</list>

<p>In case where the penult, of the verb root is necessarily long, as when its vowel is <corr sic=follwed resp=errata>followed</corr> by more than one consonant, and when the last syllable of the root is pronounced independently from the consonant or consonants preceding it, then the original acute accent of the root is preserved on the penult of the verbal. As

<table id=tb44.2>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

<row><cell>from <cell><foreign lang=war>cánhi</foreign> (to come), <cell><foreign lang=war>dól-ong</foreign> (to bear, to accompany)
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>paracánhi        <cell lang=war>paradól-ong
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>tigcánhi         <cell lang=war>tigdól-ong
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>cumaránhi        <cell lang=war>domoról-ong
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>caranhían        <cell lang=war>dorol-óngan
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>caranhíon        <cell lang=war>dorol-óngon
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>macanhíon        <cell lang=war>madol-óngon
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>icaránhi         <cell lang=war>idoról-ong
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>han&gtilde;aránhi      <cell lang=war>hinonól-ong
</table>

<p>In the derivatives, when the accent is on the penult of the primitive, it is also placed on the penult of the <pb id=pb45 n=45>derivative; and when the accent is on the last syllable of the primitive, it is also put on the last syllable of the derivative, as

<table id=tb45.1>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>áram,     <cell lang=war>maáram
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>bayáu,    <cell lang=war>mabaráyau
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>púsod,    <cell lang=war>himósod
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>búua,     <cell lang=war>buuáon
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>tubác,    <cell lang=war>tubacón.
</table>

<p>It must be noted that we refer to the <hi>acute</hi> accent. It sometimes happens that the last syllable of the primitive has angular accent, in which case such accent is discomposed, the grave being kept and the acute being transposed to the penult of the derivative, as

<table>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>salâ, <cell lang=war>saláan,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>where the <hi>a</hi> of the penult really bears two accents, angular and grave, the angular not being employed for the reason that is it not necessary, as the last two <hi>aa</hi> are pronounced separately<note n=1>See &ldquo;Vowels&rdquo;, page 5 of this book.</note>, and because it is not proper, as the angular accent is only used at the endings of the words.<note n=2>See &ldquo;Rule&rdquo;, page 3 of this book.</note>

<p>In the derivatives formed with <hi lang=war>taga</hi>, or <hi lang=war>tag</hi>, or <hi lang=war>maqui</hi> the accent of the root is not changed. As

<table id=tb45.2>
<column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>bódo,     <cell>(salted fish),    <cell lang=war>tagabódo
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>baláy     <cell>(house),          <cell lang=war>tagbaláy
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>calámay   <cell>(dark sugar)      <cell lang=war>maquicalámay
</table>

<p>The comparatives formed with, the interfix <hi lang=war>ro</hi>, have always the accent on the last syllable no matter where it was in the primitive. As

<table id=tb45.3>
<column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>halábà    <cell>(long),   <cell lang=war>harohalabâ
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>uguis     <cell>(white),  <cell lang=war>urouguís.
</table>

<p>The superlatives formed with the prefix <hi lang=war>gui</hi> and the affix <hi>i</hi> always have the accent on the penult, without regarding where it was in the primitive. As

<pb id=pb46 n=46>
<table id=tb46.1>
<column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>halárum <cell>(deep),       <cell lang=war>guihahalarúmi
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>matahúm <cell>(beautiful),  <cell lang=war>guimamatahúmi
</table>


<p>The collectives follow the way in which their primitives are accented, so, if their, primitives have the accent on the penult, they have it on the penult, and when the primitives have the accent on the last syllable they also have it on their last syllables. As

<table id=tb46.2>
<column><column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column>

<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>bátà <cell>(child),     <cell lang=war><corr sic="cabataán" resp=errata>cabatáan</corr>
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>baláy <cell>(house),    <cell lang=war>cabalayán.
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>

<p>It must be observed also that there are nouns which, thru phonetical variations, have more than one forms. Of such words are the following:


<table id=tb46.3>
    <row><cell lang=war>báchò, bíchò <cell>(groaning)
    <row><cell lang=war>bándoc, búndac <cell>(kick)
    <row><cell lang=war><corr sic="guipác" resp=errata>guipic</corr>, guipác <cell>(broken)
    <row><cell lang=war>guisî, gusî, quisî, cusî <cell>(sagged)
    <row><cell lang=war>Panalaron, Palanaron, Planaron <cell>(one of the suburbs of the town of Tacloban),<note n=1>However, the correct and proper form is the first, <hi lang=war>Panalaron</hi>, a verbal derived from <hi lang=war>panalad</hi> a plural infinitive of the verb <hi lang=war>pagsálad</hi> which means &ldquo;to sound&rdquo;. The said suburb of Tacloban, it is believed took this name from the fact that, anciently, the people used <hi>to sound (<foreign lang=war>panálad</foreign>)</hi> in such place which was then covered by the sea.</note>
    <row><cell lang=war>piló, lopí <cell>(fold)
    <row><cell lang=war>quíróg, coróg <cell>(trembling)
    <row><cell lang=war>quirógpos, corógpos <cell>(surtout)
    <row><cell lang=war>sitsit, sutsut <cell>(whistle)
    <row><cell lang=war>taclap, taplac <cell>(blanket), etc.
</table>


<p>There are also words composed of the same letters but sounding differently and having different meanings thereby, on account of the separation with which some of their syllables are pronounced. As

<table id=tb46.4>
    <column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

    <row><cell lang=war>bágo <cell>(a tree), <cell>bag-o <cell>(new)
    <row><cell lang=war>lauay <cell>(<corr sic=saliba resp=errata>saliva</corr>), <cell lang=war>lau-ay <cell>(repugnance)
    <row><cell lang=war>tagóc <cell>(<corr sic=resine resp=errata>resin</corr>), <cell lang=war>tág-oc <cell>(<corr sic=unarticulate resp=errata>inarticulate</corr> voice).
    <pb id=pb47 n=47><row><cell lang=war>bágang <cell>(an insect), <cell lang=war>bág-ang <cell>(grinder)
    <row><cell lang=war>bútol <cell>(bulky), <cell lang=war>bút-ol <cell>(throat)
    <row><cell lang=war>bulánon <cell>(moony), <cell lang=war>bul&apos;ánon <cell>(from Bohol), etc.
</table>




<div2 id=ch2.1.3>
<head><corr sic=PRONOUN>PRONOUNS</corr></head>

<p>There are four classes: personal, demonstrative, possessive, and relative.


<div3 id=ch2.1.3.1>
<head>PERSONAL.</head>

<p>They are the following:

<table id=tb47.1>
<column><column rend="padding-right(2em)"><column><column>

<row role=label rend=center><cell cols=2>SINGULAR      <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row><cell lang=war>Acó <cell>(I)                   <cell lang=war>Quitá, camí <cell>(we)<note n=3><hi lang=war>Quita</hi> means &ldquo;we&rdquo;, the listener included; <hi lang=war>camí</hi> means &ldquo;we&rdquo;, the listener excluded.</note>
<row><cell lang=war>Icáo, ca,<note n=1>Only used after the verb.</note> <cell>(thou, you)     <cell lang=war>Camó <cell>(you)
<row><cell lang=war>Hiyá, <foreign lang=en>or</foreign> siyá<note n=2><hi lang=war>Hiyá</hi> and <hi lang=war>siyá</hi> are the same. See the note 2 on page 7 of this book. The same may be said about <hi lang=war>hirá</hi> and <hi lang=war>sirá</hi>.</note> <cell>(he or she) <cell lang=war>Hirá, <foreign lang=en>or</foreign> sirá <cell>(they)
</table>


<div4>
<head>Declension</head>

<p>The cases are four; nominative, genitive, objective, and vocative.


<div5 type=Section>
<head>First person.&mdash;Singular.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Nominative.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Acó       <cell>(I)
<row><cell>Genitive.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Nácon,<note n=4 lang=en>Contracted from <hi lang=war>ni</hi> (of) and <hi lang=war>ácon</hi> (mine).</note> ácon, co    <cell>(of, by me)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Ha ácon, dácon<note n=5 lang=en>Contracted from <hi lang=war>da</hi> and <hi lang=war>ácon</hi>. This particle <hi>da</hi> is used in some places as equivalent to the preposition <hi lang=war>ha</hi> or the contraction <hi>han</hi>. So in Carigata, Leyte, they say <hi>dahani</hi> (at old times), instead of <hi lang=war>hanhaní</hi> used in Tacloban and other towns of Leyte. The forms <hi lang=war>damon, daton, dimo, diyo, diya, dira</hi> have the same explanation.</note>    <cell>(to, for, in, at, on, upon, over, under, etc. me)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Nominative,&mdash; <cell lang=war>Camí&mdash;quitá.<note n=6 lang=en><hi lang=war>Quita</hi> is frequently used for &ldquo;acó&rdquo;, as when we say <hi lang=war>tagui quitá hin salapî</hi>, (give me money), instead of <hi lang=war>tagui aco hin salapî.</hi></note> <cell>(we)
<pb id=pb48 n=48><row><cell>Genitive.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Nímon, ámon&mdash;aaton, aton, ta <cell>(of, by us)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Ha ámon, dámon&mdash;ha áton, dáton <cell>(to, for, etc. us)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Second person.&mdash;Singular.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Nominative.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Icáo, ca <cell>(thou, you)
<row><cell>Genitive.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Nimo, imo, mo <cell>(of, by thee, or you)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Ha imo, dimo <cell>(to, for, etc. thee, or you)
<row><cell>Vocative.&mdash; <cell lang=war>Icao <cell>(thou, or you)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Nominative.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Camó <cell>(you)
<row><cell>Genitive.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Niyo, iyo <cell>(of, by you)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha iyo, díyo <cell>(to, for, etc. you)
<row><cell>Vocative.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Camó <cell>(you)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Third person&mdash;Singular.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Nominative.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hiyá <cell>(he, or she)
<row><cell>Genitive.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Niya, iya <cell>(of, by him, or her)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha iya, díya <cell>(to, for, etc. him or her)
<row><cell>Vocative&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hiyá <cell>(He, or she).
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Nominative&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hirá <cell>(They)
<row><cell>Genitive&mdash;<cell lang=war>Nira, ira <cell>(of, by them)
<row><cell>Objective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha ira, dira <cell>(to, for etc., them)
<row><cell>Vocative&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hirá <cell>(they).
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.3.2>
<head><corr sic=Demonstratives>DEMONSTRATIVE</corr>.</head>

<p>They have the same forms both for the singular and plural, as follows:


<table id=tb48.1>
<row><cell lang=war>adí <cell>(this, these, nearer to the speaker than to the listener)
<row><cell lang=war>ini <cell>(this, these)
<row><cell lang=war>itó <cell>(that, those, nearer to the speaker than to the listener, corresponding to the Spanish &ldquo;ese, esa, eso, esos, esas&rdquo;)
<pb id=pb49 n=49><row><cell lang=war>adto <cell>(that, those, <corr sic="further from the speaker than from">far from both the speaker and</corr> the listener, and corresponding to the Spanish &ldquo;<foreign lang=es>aquel, aquella, aquellos, aquellas</foreign>&rdquo;).
</table>


<p>When used before the nouns, they have the particle <hi lang=war>nga</hi> after them; said particle being frequently contracted with the pronun. As

<table id=tb48.2>
<row><cell lang=war>adí n&gtilde;a,  <cell>contracted adín,
<row><cell lang=war>iní n&gtilde;a,  <cell>contracted inín,
<row><cell lang=war>itó n&gtilde;a,  <cell>contracted itón,
<row><cell lang=war>ádto n&gtilde;a, <cell>contracted ádton.
</table>

<p>The form <hi lang=war>itón</hi> sometimes takes again the particle n&gtilde;a. So it is said <hi lang=war>itón n&gtilde;a batâ</hi> (that boy or girl).

<p><foreign lang=war>Adí, adto</foreign> in some places have their variants <hi lang=war>yadi, yadto</hi>.

<p>In plural, the particle <hi lang=war>mga</hi> is placed after the preceding combinations;

<p>They have two cases: subjective and objective.



<div4>
<head>Declension.</head>


<div5>
<head><foreign lang=war>Adí</foreign>.&mdash;Singular</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Adí, adí n&gtilde;a, adín <cell>(this)
<row><cell>Objective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hadí, hadí n&gtilde;a, hadín, or hadin m&gtilde;a <cell>(of, etc. this)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Adí, adi n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, adín m&gtilde;a <cell>(these)
<row><cell>Objective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hadí, hadi n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, hadín, or hadin m&gtilde;a <cell>(of, etc., these).
</table>


<div5>
<head><foreign lang=war>Iní</foreign>.&mdash;Singular</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Iní, iní n&gtilde;a, inín <cell>(this)
<row><cell>Objective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hiní, hiní n&gtilde;a, hinín <cell>(of, etc., this)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Iní, ini n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, inín m&gtilde;a <cell>(these)
<row><cell>Objective,&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hiní, hini n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, hinin m&gtilde;a <cell>(of, etc., these).
</table>


<pb id=pb50 n=50><div5>
<head><foreign lang=war>Itó</foreign>.&mdash;Singular.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Itó, itó n&gtilde;a, itón, itón n&gtilde;a <cell>(that)
<row><cell>Objective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hitó, hitó n&gtilde;a, hitón, hitón, n&gtilde;a <cell>(of, etc. that)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Itó, itó n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, itón m&gtilde;a, itón n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a <cell>(those)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hitó, hitó n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, hitón m&gtilde;a, hitón n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a <cell>(of, etc., those)
</table>


<div5>
<head><foreign lang=war>Adto</foreign>.&mdash;Singular.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Adto, adto n&gtilde;a, adton <cell>(that)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hadto, hadto n&gtilde;a, hadton <cell>(of, etc., that)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Adto, adto n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, adton m&gtilde;a <cell>(those)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hadto, hadto n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a, hadton m&gtilde;a <cell>(of, etc., those)
</table>


<p>The forms <hi lang=war>adton</hi> and <hi lang=war>hadton</hi> are frequently used instead of <hi lang=war>itón, hitón</hi> when the object referred to is very close to the listener. <hi lang=war>Itón</hi> is sometimes replaced by the <choice resp=errata><sic>form <hi lang=war>hadtón</hi></sic><corr>forms <hi lang=war>hadto</hi> and <hi lang=war>haton</hi></corr></choice>. Examples:

<table>
<row><cell lang=war>mopáy <hi>adtón</hi> hiní <cell>(that one is better than this)
<row><cell lang=war>condî darodacô iní <hi>hadton</hi> <cell>(but this is larger than that)
<row><cell lang=war>say co <hi>hatón</hi> <cell>(I prefer that one).
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.3.3>
<head>POSSESSIVE.</head>

<p>They are the following:


<table id=tb50.1>
<row role=label rend=center><cell cols=2>SINGULAR           <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row><cell lang=war>acon, co <cell>(my, mine)                  <cell lang=war>aton, ta, amon <cell>(our, ours)
<row><cell lang=war>imo, mo <cell>(thy, thine, your, yours)    <cell lang=war>iyo <cell>(your, yours)
<row><cell lang=war>iya <cell>(his or her)                     <cell lang=war>ira <cell>(their)
</table>


<p>The forms <hi lang=war>co, mo, ta</hi> are used only after the nouns.

<pb id=pb51 n=51><p>The same distinction exists between <hi lang=war>aton</hi> and <hi lang=war>amon</hi>, as between <hi lang=war>quitá</hi> and <hi lang=war>camí</hi>.<note n=A>See &ldquo;Personal pronouns&rdquo; page 47.</note>

<p>They have also two cases: subjective, and objective.


<div4>
<head>Declension.</head>


<div5>
<head><foreign lang=war>Acon</foreign>.&mdash;Singular.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Acon, co <cell>(my, mine)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha acon, han acon <cell>(of, etc., my)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Aton, ta, amon <cell>(our, ours)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha aton, han aton, ha amon, han amon <cell>(of, etc., our)
</table>


<div5>
<head><foreign lang=war>Imo</foreign>.&mdash;Singular.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Imo, mo <cell>(thy, thine, your, yours)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha imo, han imo <cell>(of, etc., your, thy)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Iyo <cell>(your, yours)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha iyo, han iyo <cell>(of, etc., your)
</table>


<div5>
<head><foreign lang=war>Iya</foreign>&mdash;Singular<corr>.</corr></head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Iya <cell>(his, her, hers)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha iya, han iya <cell>(of, etc., his, her)
</table>


<div5>
<head>Plural.</head>


<p><table>
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ira <cell>(their)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Ha ira, han ira <cell>(of, etc., their)
</table>


<p>These plurals refer to the subjects possessing. The plural referring to the objects possessed, is formed in each case by using the particle <hi lang=war>m&gtilde;a</hi>, <corr sic=As>as</corr>


<table>
<row><cell lang=war>Acon m&gtilde;a cabogtóan <cell>(my brothers or sisters)
<row><cell lang=war>Iyo m&gtilde;a láuas <cell>(your bodies)
<row><cell lang=war>Ira m&gtilde;a cabalayán <cell>(their houses)
</table>



<pb id=pb52 n=52>
<div3 id=ch2.1.3.4>
<head><corr sic=REEALATIVE resp=errata>RELATIVE</corr></head>

<p>They are as follows:


<table id=tb52.1>
    <row><cell lang=war>N&gtilde;a <cell>(that, which)
    <row><cell lang=war>anó <cell>(what)
    <row><cell lang=war>bisan anó <cell>(whatever)
    <row><cell lang=war>hín&apos;o or sin&apos;o<note n=1 lang=en>See the note 2 on page 7. We use apostrophe and not hyphen, because <hi lang=war>hin&apos;o, sin&apos;o</hi> are contracted from <hi lang=war>hi ano</hi> and <hi lang=war>si ano</hi>.</note> <cell>(who)
    <row><cell lang=war>bisan hin&apos;o or bisan sin&apos;o <cell>(whoever)
    <row><cell lang=war>háin <cell>(which)
    <row><cell lang=war>bisan háin <cell>(whichever)
</table>


<p>These pronouns, except <hi lang=war>hin&apos;o</hi> and <hi lang=war>bisan hin&apos;o</hi> have no <corr sic=inflexion resp=errata>inflection</corr> for cases.



<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>N&gtilde;a.</hi></head>

<p>This relative always refers to the subject of the verb. It never relates to the complement. So the sentence:

    <p rend=example>&ldquo;the house <hi>that</hi> Peter builds is big&rdquo;,

<p rend=noindent>cannot be translated <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr> into Bisayan. It is <corr sic=verted resp=errata>expressed</corr> by passive voice. Thus:

    <p rend=example lang=war>&ldquo;an baláy <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> guintitindog ni Pedro, dacô&rdquo;;

<p rend=noindent><corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr> &ldquo;the house that is being built by Peter is big&rdquo;, And this:

    <p rend=example>&ldquo;the book which you gave me yesterday&rdquo;

<p rend=noindent>is translated:

    <p rend=example lang=war>&ldquo;an basahón <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> ihinátag mo ha acon cacolóp&rdquo;;

<p rend=noindent><corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr> &ldquo;the book which was given by you to me yesterday&rdquo;

<p>This pronoun is indispensable when a substantive is qualified by an adjective, as

<table id=tb52.2>
    <row><cell lang=war>maópay <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> táuo <cell>(good man,) <cell>not <cell lang=war>maúpay táuo,
    <row><cell lang=war>bucad n&gtilde;a mahamót <cell>(fragrant <corr sic=flwer resp=errata>flower</corr>) <cell>not <cell lang=war>bucád mahamot<note n=2 lang=en>However in this form in which the substantive <corr sic="preceds the adjetive" resp=errata>precedes the adjective</corr> the suppression of <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> is <corr sic=permisible resp=errata>permissible</corr> in poetry.</note>
</table>

<p>It differs from the conjunction <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi> (that) in that the <pb id=pb53 n=53>pronoun always refers to a noun, never to a verb.

<p>NOTE.&mdash;This particle <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi> expresses in some instances the idea of &ldquo;saying,&rdquo; &ldquo;question,&rdquo; &ldquo;answer,&rdquo; etc., as when we say:

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>N&gtilde;a</hi> ni Pedro: &ldquo;tágui acó hin salapí.&rdquo; Dáyon batón ni Juan, <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> niya: &ldquo;uaray co salapí.&rdquo;

<p>Peter said: &ldquo;give me money.&rdquo; John immediately replied by saying: &ldquo;I have no money.&rdquo;

    <p rend=example lang=war>Pacanhía hi Guillermo. <hi>N&gtilde;a</hi> natón<note n=1 lang=en>This is another irregularity of the pronoun <hi lang=war>quita</hi>. Here it is equivalent to <hi lang=war>nimo</hi>; but this last form is inadmissible in such phrase, <hi lang=war>naton</hi> being the special pronoun for the same.</note> &ldquo;guinquiquína han&gtilde;lan ca didto.&rdquo;

    <p rend=example>Make Guillermo come. Tell him: &ldquo;you are needed there.&rdquo;

<p>When applied to the third person it is frequently combined with the particle <hi lang=war>laón&gtilde;</hi> as:

    <p rend=example lang=war>Násirin&gtilde; hi Pedro, n&gtilde;alaón&gtilde;: &ldquo;magtotoón aco.&rdquo;

    <p rend=example><corr sic="("></corr>Peter said: &ldquo;I shall study&rdquo;<corr sic=")"></corr>.

<p>This special idea conveyed by the word <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi> seems to show in other instances in the Bisayan tongue, as when it is said depreciatively:

    <p rend=example lang=war>¡Ca damò hin im n&gtilde;an&gtilde;a!

    <p rend=example>How many things you ask or talk!

<p rend=noindent>where the doubled <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi> means request or talking.


<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Anó.</hi></head>

<p>This pronoun has the same use as the English <hi>what</hi>, except when the latter is used as an objective relative, in which case the said English pronoun is translated by the article <hi lang=war>an</hi><corr>.</corr> As when it is said:

    <p rend=example>&ldquo;<hi>What</hi> you need is patience, not science,&rdquo; which is translated:

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>An</hi> guinquiquinahan&gtilde;lan mo an pag-ílob, dirì hibaró.


<pb id=pb54 n=54>
<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Bisan anó.</hi></head>


<p><hi lang=war>Bisan ano</hi> means &ldquo;anything&rdquo; or &ldquo;whatever.&rdquo; Examples:

    <p rend=example>Whatever you do I&apos;ll know it.

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>Bisan ano</hi> in buháton mo, hisasabotán co.

    <p rend=example>Give me anything eatable.

    <p rend=example lang=war>Tágui aco hin <hi>bisan anó</hi> n&gtilde;a hacaraón.

<p>It is frequently replaced by <hi lang=war>ano <corr sic=la>lâ</corr></hi>, or <hi lang=war>anoano lâ</hi>. Ex.:

    <p rend=example>Anything you may desire, I&apos;ll give you.

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>Ano lâ</hi> n&gtilde;a caruyágon mo, ihahatag co ha imo.

    <p rend=example>You wish to see everything.

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>Anoano lâ</hi> buót mo hiquit&apos;an.

<p>When it is preceded by an article, it means &ldquo;which,&rdquo; as

    <p rend=example>Which horse do you like?

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>¿An anó</hi> n&gtilde;a cabayo in buót mo?



<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Hin&apos;o</hi></head>

<p>This relative is only used in the interrogative phrases. It is not employed as the English &ldquo;who&rdquo; when this relative serves as &ldquo;that&rdquo;. So this phrase

    <p rend=example>&ldquo;that person <hi>who</hi> talks is my brother&rdquo; is translated: &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>itón tauo <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> nagyayácan, acon bugto</foreign>,&rdquo; not &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>itón tauo <hi>hin&apos;o</hi> nagyayácan</foreign>, etc.&rdquo;

<p>It has two cases: subjective and objective.


<div5 type=Subsection>
<head>Declension</head>


<p><table id=tb54.1>
<row role=label><cell>      <cell cols=2>SINGULAR                   <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row><cell>Subjective&mdash;<cell lang=war>Hin&apos;o <cell>(who)            <cell lang=war>Hirá hin&apos;o <cell>(who)
<row><cell>Objective&mdash; <cell lang=war>Canáy, can canáy <cell>(of, etc. whom whose)  <cell lang=war>Canda canáy <cell>(of, etc., whom, whose)
</table>


<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Bisan hin&apos;o</hi></head>

<p><hi>Bisan hin&apos;o</hi> means &ldquo;whoever&rdquo; or &ldquo;anyone&rdquo;. Example:

    <pb id=pb55 n=55><p rend=example>Whoever is there, let him come.

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>Bisan hin&apos;o</hi> in adâ, pacanhía.

    <p rend=example>Anyone knows him.

    <p rend=example lang=war><hi>Bisan hin&apos;o</hi> náquilála ha iya.

<p>It also has two cases: subjective and objective.


<div5>
<head>Declension.</head>

<p><table id=tb55.1>
<row role=label><cell><cell cols=2>SINGULAR                             <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row><cell>Subjective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Bisan hin&apos;o <cell>(whoever)   <cell lang=war>Bisan hirá hin&apos;o <cell>(whoever)
<row><cell>Objective.&mdash;<cell lang=war>Bisan canáy <cell>(of, etc., whomever) <cell lang=war>Bisan canda canáy <cell>(of etc., whoever)
</table>


<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Hain</hi>.</head>

<p><hi lang=war>Hain</hi> means &ldquo;which.&rdquo; Examples:


    <p rend=example>Which of these hats is yours?

    <p rend=example lang=war>¿Háin hiní n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a calò in imo?


<p>Similarly to &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>ano</foreign>,&rdquo; the pronoun &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>háin</foreign>&rdquo; is only used in the interrogative forms, never as <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi> (that). So the phrase

    <p rend=example>&ldquo;the book which you saw&rdquo;

<p rend=noindent>is translated

    <p rend=example lang=war>&ldquo;<corr sic=and>an</corr> basahón <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> imo quinità&rdquo;

<p>(literally: the book that was seen by you), and not

    <p rend=example lang=war>&ldquo;an basahon <hi>háin</hi> icao quinmità.<corr>&rdquo;</corr>


<div4>
<head><hi lang=war>Bisan háin.</hi></head>

<p>It is equivalent to the English &ldquo;whichever,&rdquo; Examples:

    <p rend=example>Whichever of those books satisfies me.

    <p rend=example lang=war>Didâ hitó n&gtilde;a mga basahón <hi>bisan háin</hi> maopay co.

<p>NOTE.&mdash;These relatives <hi lang=war>hain</hi> and <hi lang=war>bisan háin</hi> must not be confounded with the adverbs of the same form, <hi lang=war>háin</hi> (where) and <hi lang=war>bisan háin</hi> (wherever). The former refer only to nouns, the latter to verbs.



<pb id=pb56 n=56>
<div3 id=ch2.1.3.5>
<head><corr sic=Contractions>CONTRACTIONS</corr>.</head>

<p>The pronouns are frequently contracted as follows:


<table id=tb56.1 lang=war>
<row><cell>acó, ácon,   <cell lang=en><seg id=to>to</seg>     <cell><hi>ac</hi>
<row><cell>nácon        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>nac</hi>
<row><cell>dácon        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>dac</hi>
<row><cell>camí         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>cam</hi>
<row><cell>quitá        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>quit</hi>
<row><cell>námon        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>nam</hi>
<row><cell>ámon         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>am</hi>
<row><cell>náton        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>nat</hi>
<row><cell>áton         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>at</hi>
<row><cell>dámon        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>dam</hi>
<row><cell>dáton        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>dat</hi>
<row><cell>icáo         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>ic</hi>
<row><cell>nímo         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>nim</hi>
<row><cell>imo          <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>im</hi>
<row><cell>dimo         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>dim</hi>
<row><cell>camó         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>cam</hi>
<row><cell>adi          <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>ad</hi>
<row><cell>iní          <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>in</hi>
<row><cell>itó          <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>it</hi>
<row><cell>adín         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>ad</hi>
<row><cell>itón         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>it</hi>
<row><cell>hadí         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>had</hi>
<row><cell>hadín        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>had</hi>
<row><cell>hiní         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>hin</hi>
<row><cell>hinín        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>hin</hi>
<row><cell>hitó         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>hit</hi>
<row><cell>hitón        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>hit</hi>
<row><cell>hatón        <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>hat</hi>
<row><cell>ácon         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>ac</hi>
<row><cell>áton         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>at</hi>
<row><cell>ámon         <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>am</hi>
<row><cell>imo          <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>ini</hi>
<row><cell>bisan anó    <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>bis ano</hi>
<row><cell>bisan háin   <cell><seg copyOf=to>,,</seg> <cell><hi>bis hain</hi>
</table>




<pb id=pb57 n=57>
<div2 id=ch2.1.4>
<head><corr sic=VERB>VERBS</corr></head>


<p>The verbs may be grouped in the following classes:

<p>As to their conjugation: active, passive, negative, interrogative, suppletory, impersonal, defective.

<p>As to their inflections: primitive, and progressive.

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Active</hi> verb represents the subject as acting, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>acó násugò</foreign> (I order).

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Passive</hi> verb represents the subject as being acted upon, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>acó sinúsugò</foreign> (I am ordered).

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Negative</hi> verb involves a negation, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>ayáo catúrog</foreign> (do not sleep).

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Interrogative</hi> verb involves a question, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>¿diín ca cadto?</foreign> (where did you go?)

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Suppletory</hi> verb supplies the lack of all auxiliary and a few other verbs as from <hi lang=war>ini</hi> (this), we have:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>íiní acó</foreign> (I am here), to express the verb &ldquo;to be,&rdquo; in Bisayan.

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Impersonal</hi> verb has not a definite subject, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>náurán</foreign> (it rains).

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Defective</hi> verb lacks one or more of its principal parts as,

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>iyá</foreign> (receive it).

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Primitive</hi> verb is used in its original and simplest form as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>acó násurát</foreign> (I write).

<p>The <hi rend=sc>Progressive</hi> verb denotes continuance of the action, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>acó nagusurát</foreign> (I am writing).




<pb id=pb58 n=58>
<div3 id=ch2.1.4.1>
<head>CONJUGATION</head>

<div4 id=ch2.1.4.1.0>
<head>VOICES</head>

<p>They are active and passive. The passive voice has three classes: direct, indirect, and instrumental.

<p>The direct passive is where the subject is the direct object in active voice, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>suratá an acon n&gtilde;aran</foreign> (write my name; literally: let my name be written by you).

<p>The indirect passive is where the subject is an indirect object of the verb in its active voice, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>suratí an imo amáy</foreign> (write to your father; literally: let a letter be written by you to your father),

<p>The instrumental passive is where the subject is the instrument or real object of the action, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>igsurát iní n&gtilde;a pluma</foreign> (write with this pen; <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr>: let this pen be used by you in writing.)


<div4 id=ch2.1.4.1.1>
<head>MOODS AND TENSES</head>

<p>There are four moods: infinitive, indicative, imperative, and subjunctive,

<p>The infinitive has two tenses: present, and gerund; three in passive voice: present, gerund, and past participle.

<p>The indicative has three. The ordinary forms have present, past and future. The irregular forms have present, imperfect past, and past.

<p>The imperative and subjunctive, have each one tense: present.

<p><hi rend=sc>Infinitive</hi>: The present is frequently used as a noun, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>an pagcáon</foreign> (the meal).

<p>The gerund is frequently used in compound sentences for past tenses, as:

    <pb id=pb59 n=59><p rend=example><foreign lang=war>han pag-abot co</foreign> (when I arrived: <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr>: upon my arriving).

<p>The past participle is employed as an adjective as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>hinigugma co n&gtilde;a iróy</foreign><corr sic=":">.</corr> (my dear mother; <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr>: mother loved by me).

<p>NOTE.&mdash;There are in Bisayan forms resembling and equivalent in many instances to the Latin infinitive future ending in <hi>rus</hi>, in active, and in <hi>dus</hi>, in passive, as <hi>amaturus</hi> and <hi>amandus</hi>. Such Bisayan forms are those formed by the particle <hi lang=war>um</hi> combined with the interfix <hi lang=war>r</hi> or its substitutes (See page <ref target=pb20 type=pageref>20</ref>), as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>cumaráon</foreign> (one who is to eat)

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>caraonón</foreign> (a thing to be eaten).

<p><hi rend=sc>Indicative</hi>. Ordinary forms. The present corresponds to the same tense, in English, and also to the Spanish and Latin imperfect past. As:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>nácaon acó</foreign> (I eat)

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>nácaon acó han pag-abot mo</foreign> (I was eating when you arrived)

<p>The past tense represents the English present perfect, and past, indicative mood. As:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>nagsurát acó</foreign> <corr resp=errata>(</corr>I have written<corr sic=" (">, </corr>I wrote)

<p>The future corresponds to the English future tense, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>másurat acó</foreign> (I shall write)

<p>Suppletory forms. The present represents the English present and future tenses, indicative. As:

    <p rend=example>He is here: <foreign lang=war>hiyá háhani</foreign>.

    <p rend=example>He will be here tomorrow: <foreign lang=war>hiyá hahaní buás</foreign><corr>.</corr>

<p>The imperfect past and past tense corresponds to the same tense of the Latin and Spanish languages: as

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>didinhi<note n=1 lang=en>In Dulag and other places of Leyte, this word is pronounced <hi lang=war>didínhi</hi>.</note> hi Juan han pag-abót co</foreign> (John was here, when I arrived)



<pb id=pb60 n=60><p><hi rend=sc>Imperative and Subjunctive</hi>. The single tense (present) of each of these moods corresponds to the same tense in English, as:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>cadto búas</foreign> (go there to-morrow)

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>cun cumadto ca buas, tauága acó</foreign> (If you go there tomorrow, call me).

<p><hi rend=sc>Observations.</hi> 1<corr>.</corr> The English past perfect, indicative, is supplied in Bisayan by the present tense, indicative, of the potential form which we shall see later.<note n=1>See &ldquo;Other classes of verbs&rdquo;, <hi>infra</hi>.</note> As:

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>han imo pag-abót nacacatima na acó</foreign> (when you arrived, I had already finished)<corr>.</corr>

<p>2. The English future perfect tense is supplied in Bisayan by the future tense, indicative, of the potential form. As

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>umabút ca n&gtilde;anì macacatima na aco</foreign> (when you arrive, I shall have finished)<corr sic=",">.</corr>

<p>3. The Latin and Spanish imperfect past tense, <corr sic=subjuntive resp=errata>subjunctive</corr> mood, is supplied in Bisayan by the present, subjunctive, and future indicative. As

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>Cun gumican acó niyán, diri co hiya igquiquita buás</foreign> (If I should go today, I would not meet him tó-morrow).

<p>4. The Latin and Spanish perfect past tense, subjunctive, is supplied in Bisayan by the past tense, indicative.

<p>5. The Latin and Spanish plusquamperfect past tense, subjunctive, is supplied in Bisayan by the past and future (potential) tenses, indicative, respectively. As

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>Cun nagdágmit acó, hinaabután co cunta hiyá</foreign> (If I <corr sic=hade resp=errata>had</corr> hastened, I should have reached him)<corr>.</corr>

<p>6. The Latin and Spanish imperfect future tense, subjunctive, is supplied in Bisayan by the present subjunctive.

<p>7. And the perfect future tense, subjunctive, of said languages, is supplied in Bisayan by the present, indicative, potential form.




<pb id=pb61 n=61>
<div4 id=ch2.1.4.1.2>
<head>NUMBER AND PERSON.</head>

<p>There are two numbers: singular and plural.

<p>There are three persons: first, second, and third. Except in the imperative, the inflections of the verbs generally do not change, in each tense. However, the progressive and suppletory forms frequently undergo some changes in plural, as

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>acó nagsusurát</foreign> (I am writing),

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>camí nanunurát</foreign> (we are writing)




<div2 id=ch2.1.4.2>
<head>INFLECTIONS.</head>

<p>The inflections are determined by particles, which are shown in the following tables:

<p>(In the tables below, the dash<corr sic=","></corr> represents the root; the sign (d) means that the first syllable of the root is doubled; <hi>s</hi> and <hi>p</hi> mean singular and plural, respectively).


<table id=tb61.1>
<head>TABLE 1</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi>Primitive active</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive
<row><cell>Present, and gerund: <cell><hi rend=asc lang=war>PAG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc lang=war>PANG&mdash;, PAM&mdash;, PAN&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative
<row><cell>Present:     <cell><hi rend=asc lang=war>NA&mdash;</hi>
<row><cell>Past:        <cell><hi rend=asc lang=war>INM&mdash;</hi>, or <hi rend=asc lang=war>&mdash;INM</hi>&mdash;
<row><cell>Future:      <cell><hi rend=asc lang=war>MA&mdash;</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative
<row><cell cols=2>(the root unaltered)
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive<corr sic="&mdash;"></corr>
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc lang=war>UM&mdash;</hi>, or <hi rend=asc lang=war>&mdash;UM</hi>&mdash;
</table>


<pb id=pb62 n=62><p>OBSERVATIONS:

<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>. The present and gerund are formed by the prefix <hi lang=war>pag</hi>, and the root. In the plural, the <hi lang=war>g</hi> of <hi lang=war>pag</hi> undergoes the following changes:

<p>When the root begins with a vowel <hi lang=war>o</hi>: with the consonant <hi lang=war>c</hi>, the <hi lang=war>pag</hi> is changed into <hi lang=war>pang</hi> the <hi lang=war>c</hi> then being suppressed. Examples:

<table id=tb62.1>
<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>&ldquo;arò&rdquo; <cell>(to ask), <cell lang=war>pag-arò, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>pan&gtilde;aro</foreign>.
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>&ldquo;catúrog&rdquo; <cell>(to sleep), <cell lang=war>pagcátúrog, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>pan&gtilde;atúrog</foreign>.
</table>

<p>If the root commences with a labial consonant, except <hi>m, pag</hi> is transformed into <hi>pam</hi>, and then the labial consonant disappears. Examples:

<table id=tb62.2>
<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>&ldquo;báyad&rdquo; <cell>(to pay), <cell lang=war>pagbáyad, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>pamáyad</foreign>.
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>&ldquo;pilì&rdquo; <cell>(to select), <cell lang=war>pagpilì, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>pamilì</foreign>.
</table>

<p>When the root begins with <hi lang=war>m</hi>, <hi lang=war>pag</hi> is transformed into <hi lang=war>pan</hi>, the <hi lang=war>m</hi> of the root remaining in it. <corr sic="Examp." resp=errata>Example</corr>:

<table id=tb62.3>
<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>&ldquo;múlay&rdquo; <cell>(to teach), <cell lang=war>pagmúlay, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>panmúlay</foreign>.
</table>

<p>If the root commences with any other consonant, <hi lang=war>pag</hi> is replaced by <hi lang=war>pan</hi>, the said consonant<corr sic="," resp=errata></corr> being then suppressed except when it is a <hi lang=war>g</hi> or <hi lang=war>h</hi>. Examples.

<table id=tb62.4>
<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>&ldquo;hapon&rdquo; <cell>(to perch), <cell lang=war>paghápon, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>panhápon</foreign>,
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>&ldquo;gúbat&rdquo; <cell>(to invade), <cell lang=war>paggúbat, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>pangúbat</foreign>,
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>&ldquo;búao&rdquo;  <cell>(to visit), <cell lang=war>pagdúao, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>panúno</foreign>,
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>&ldquo;tubò&rdquo;  <cell>(to grow), <cell lang=war>pagtubò, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>panubò</foreign>,
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>&ldquo;surát&rdquo; <cell>(to write), <cell lang=war>pagsurát, <cell>pl. <foreign lang=war>panurát</foreign>.
</table>


<p><hi>Indicative.</hi>&mdash;Present. The transformative particle of this tense is the prefix <hi lang=war>na</hi>, which must always be pronounced long, in order not to confound it with the short <hi lang=war>na</hi> of the passive potential form, as it will be seen later.<note n=1>See &ldquo;<corr sic=Potencial resp=errata>Potential</corr> Form&rdquo;, <hi>infra</hi>.</note> As


<table id=tb62.4b>
<row><cell>(long <hi lang=war>na</hi>)  <cell><foreign lang=war>nápilì acó</foreign> <cell>(I select)
<row><cell>(short <hi lang=war>na</hi>) <cell><foreign lang=war>napílì acó</foreign> <cell>(I was selected).
</table>


<p>Past.&mdash;This tense is determined by the interfix <hi lang=war>inm</hi> placed <pb id=pb63 n=63>between the first consonant and the first vowel of the root.

<p>When the root commences with a vowel, this particle is simply prefixed to the root. As,

    <p rend=example>from &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>surát</foreign>&rdquo; (to write), &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>abót</foreign>&rdquo; (to arrive) <foreign lang=war>acó sinmurát</foreign><note n=1>In Basay, Sámar the <hi lang=war>m</hi> is frequently suppressed, the first vowel becoming long on account of said suppression. So they say there: <hi lang=war>sínurat, ínabot</hi>.</note> (I write), <foreign lang=war>inmabót hirá</foreign> (they arrived)

<p>NOTE.&mdash;The <hi lang=war>m</hi> of <hi lang=war>imn</hi> is frequently suppressed. As,

<table id=tb63.1>
<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>&ldquo;múlay&rdquo; <cell>(to teach), <cell lang=war>abót <cell>(to arrive)
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell cols=2 lang=war>minúlay,           <cell cols=2 lang=war>inábot.
</table>


<p><hi><corr sic=Fnture resp=errata>Future</corr></hi>.&mdash;The particle determining this tense is the prefix <hi>ma</hi> which must be always pronounced long, so as not to confound it with the short <hi lang=war>ma</hi> used among the verbal and derivative nouns. As,

<table id=tb63.1b>
<row><cell>(long <hi>ma</hi>)   <cell lang=war>hiyá mácáon       <cell>(he or she will eat)
<row><cell>(short <hi>ma</hi>)  <cell lang=war>hiyá macaón       <cell>(he or she is a glutton)
<row><cell>(long)               <cell lang=war>máboron&gtilde;   <cell>(there will be fog)
<row><cell>(short)              <cell lang=war>mabóron&gtilde;   <cell>(confuse)
</table>


<p><hi>Imperative</hi>.&mdash;It is simply the root without any transformative particle.

<p>NOTE.&mdash;There is a form consisting in doubling the first syllable of the root. But this form is used only in the preceptive language, as when we say: <corr>&ldquo;</corr><foreign lang=war>tauágon ca n&gtilde;anì, bábatón</foreign>&rdquo; (whenever you are called, always answer).

<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>.&mdash;The single tense of this mood is <corr sic=dermined resp=errata>determined</corr> by the <corr sic="inter fix">interfix</corr> <hi lang=war>um</hi> which is placed between the first consonant and the first vowel of the root. If the root begins with a vowel, the interfix is added to the beginning as from &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>arò</foreign>&rdquo; (to ask), &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>umarò</foreign>,&rdquo; from &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>cáon</foreign>&rdquo; (to eat) <foreign lang=war>cumáon</foreign>.

<p>Example:

<p rend=center>Root: surát.

<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>

<table id=tb63.2>
<row><cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund <cell rows=2>{<cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagsurát <cell rows=2>}<cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to write, writing)
<row>                                                        <cell>plural:   <cell lang=war>panurát
</table>


<pb id=pb64 n=64><p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<p rend=center>PRESENT

<table id=tb64.1>
<row role=label rend=center>
    <cell cols=7>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=7>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó        <cell rows=3>}<cell rows=3 rend=vam lang=war>násurat <cell rows=3>{  <cell>I,    <cell rows=3>}<cell rows=3 rend=vam>write, etc.
    <cell rend=nowrap lang=war>camí quitá <cell rows=3>}<cell rows=3 rend=vam lang=war>násurat <cell rows=3>{  <cell>we    <cell rows=3>}<cell rows=3 rend=vam>write
<row><cell lang=war>icao                         <cell rend=nowrap>they, you                         <cell lang=war>camó                              <cell>you
<row><cell lang=war>hiyá                         <cell rend=nowrap>he, she                           <cell lang=war>hirá                              <cell>they
</table>


<p rend=center>PAST

<table id=tb64.2>
<row><cell lang=war>acó, etc. inmurát <cell>(I, etc. wrote) <cell lang=war>camí, etc. sinmurát <cell>(we, etc. wrote)
</table>

<p rend=center>FUTURE

<table id=tb64.3>
<row><cell lang=war>acó, etc. másurat <cell>(I shall, etc. write) <cell lang=war>camí, etc. másurat <cell>(we shall, etc. write)
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<table id=tb64.4>
<row><cell lang=war>surát icao <cell>(write)              <cell lang=war>sumurát<note n=A id=n64.1 lang=en>This form is taken from the <corr sic=snbjunctive resp=errata>subjunctive</corr>, as in the Spanish language.</note> camí, hirá <cell>(let us, them write)
<row><cell lang=war>sumurát<note n=A sameAs=n64.1 lang=en></note> hiya <cell>(let him or her write) <cell lang=war>surát quitá, camó <cell>(let us, you write)
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb64.5>
<row><cell lang=war>acó, etc. sumurát <cell>(I may, etc. write) <cell lang=war>camí, etc. sumurát <cell>(we may, etc. write)
</table>



<table id=tb64.6>
<head>TABLE 2.</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi>Progressive active</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>(the <corr sic=some resp=errata>same</corr> as that of the primitive active)
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative
<row><cell>Present:     <cell><hi rend=asc>NAG</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>NANG</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi rend=asc>NA</hi>(d)&mdash;, or <hi rend=asc>NAN</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Past:        <cell><hi rend=asc>NAG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>s</hi>: <hi rend=asc>NANG&mdash;, NA&mdash;</hi>, or <hi rend=asc>NAN&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Future:      <cell><hi rend=asc>MAG</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>MANG</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi rend=asc>MA</hi>(d)&mdash;, or <hi rend=asc>MAN</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>p</hi><corr>.</corr>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative.
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PANG&mdash;, PA&mdash;</hi>, or <hi rend=asc>PAN&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>MAG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>MANG&mdash;, MA&mdash;</hi>, or <hi rend=asc>MAN&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
</table>


<pb id=pb65 n=65><p>OBSERVATIONS.

<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>. Its forms are exactly the same as those of the primitive active.

<p><hi>Indicative</hi>. Present. Its singular is determined by doubling the first syllable<note n=A id=n65.1>In the towns of Dúlag, Burauen, and Abúyog, of the island of Leyte, these forms are always contracted, the first syllable of the verb so formed becoming long on account of the said contraction. Thus it is said in the mentioned places: <hi lang=war>nágsurat</hi> instead of <hi lang=war>nagsúsurat</hi>.</note> of the root, prefixed by <hi lang=war>nag</hi>.

<p>Its plural is formed according to the first letter of the root. When the root commences with a vowel, or with the consonant <hi lang=war>c</hi> as

<table id=tb65.1>
<row><cell lang=war>arò      <cell>(to ask)
<row><cell lang=war>cáon     <cell>(to eat)
</table>

<p rend=noindent>the formation takes the following process: <hi lang=war><corr sic=ng>n&gtilde;</corr></hi> is added to the beginning of the root, <hi lang=war>c</hi> being suppressed, as

<table id=tb65.2>
<row><cell lang=war>n&gtilde;aro, n&gtilde;áon;
</table>

<p rend=noindent>the first syllable is doubled,<note n="A" sameAs=n65.1></note> as

<table id=tb65.3>
<row><cell lang=war>n&gtilde;an&gtilde;aro, n&gtilde;an&gtilde;áon,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>to which the particle <hi>na</hi> is prefixed, as

<table id=tb65.4>
<row><cell lang=war>nan&gtilde;an&gtilde;arò, nan&gtilde;an&gtilde;áon,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>which is the final form.

<p>When the root commences with a labial consonant, as

<table id=tb65.5>
<row><cell lang=war>báyad    <cell>(to pay)
<row><cell lang=war>múlay,   <cell>(to teach)
<row><cell lang=war>pili     <cell>(to select),
</table>

<p rend=noindent>the formation of the plural is as follows: the first consonant of the root is replaced by <hi lang=war>m</hi>, or not altered if it<corr resp=errata> is</corr> an <hi lang=war>m</hi>, as

<table id=tb65.6>
<row><cell lang=war>máyad, múlay, mili;
</table>

<p rend=noindent>then the first syllable is doubled,<note n=A sameAs=n65.1></note> as


<pb id=pb66 n=66><table id=tb66.1>
<row><cell lang=war>mamáyad, mumúlay, mimilí;
</table>

<p rend=noindent>and the prefix <hi lang=war>nan</hi> is employed, as

<table id=tb66.2>
<row><cell lang=war>nanmamáyad, nanmumúlay, nanmimili,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>the final <corr sic=from>form</corr>.


<p>The last <hi lang=war>n</hi> of <hi lang=war>nan</hi> is frequently suppressed, as

<table id=tb66.3>
<row><cell lang=war>namamáyad
<row><cell lang=war>namimili.
</table>

<p>When the root begins with a dental consonant as

<table id=tb66.4>
<row><cell lang=war>dapò <cell>(to approach)
<row><cell lang=war>tábon <cell>(to cover)
<row><cell lang=war>surát <cell>(to write)
</table>

<p rend=noindent>the formation of the plural consists in replacing the first consonant by <hi lang=war>n</hi>, as

<table id=tb66.5>
<row><cell lang=war>napó, nabon, nurat,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>whose first syllable is doubled<note n=1>See the note on page 65.</note>, as

<table id=tb66.6>
<row><cell lang=war>nanapo, nanabon, nunurat,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>to which the particle <hi lang=war>na</hi> is prefixed as

<table id=tb66.7>
<row><cell lang=war>nanánapó, nanánabon, nanúnurat,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>the final form.


<p>If the root commences with any other consonant, the plural is formed by doubling the first syllable of the root, and by prefixing the particle <hi lang=war>nan</hi> to the root so transformed. Examples:


<table id=tb66.8>
<row><cell>from <cell lang=war>hugas <cell>(to wash)<corr>,</corr>          <cell lang=war>nanhuhugas<corr>.</corr>
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>lohód <cell>(to kneel down)<corr>,</corr>    <cell lang=war>nanlolohod<corr>.</corr>
<row><cell>     <cell lang=war>rabot <cell>(to pull),                       <cell lang=war>nanrarabot.
</table>


<p>Past. The singular is formed by adding to the root the prefix <hi lang=war>nag</hi>.

<pb id=pb67 n=67><p><corr sic=Ehe resp=errata>The</corr> plural is formed exactly as the plural present, except in that the first syllable of the root transformed is not doubled.

<p><hi>Future</hi>.&mdash;The formation of this tense is the same, both in singular and plural, as that of the present, <corr sic=excep resp=errata>except</corr> in that the prefixes used here are <hi>mag, ma, man, mang,</hi> instead of <hi>nag, na, nan, nang.</hi>

<p><hi>Imperative</hi>.&mdash;In singular, the prefixes <hi lang=war>pag</hi> and <hi lang=war>mag</hi> are employed. In plural, the prefixes, <hi lang=war>pa, pan, pang, ma, man, mang,</hi> are used in the same way and cases as the prefixes <hi lang=war>na, nan, nang,</hi> in the present indicative.

<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>.&mdash;It is formed in the same way as the future indicative, except in that the first syllable of the root is not doubled here.


<p rend=center>Root: surát (write)

<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>

<table id=tb67.1>
<row><cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagurát <cell rows=2>} <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to be writing, being writing)
<row>                                                <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>panurat
</table>

<table id=tb67.2>
<row><cell cols=4 rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<row><cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT

<row rend=center><cell cols=2>SINGULAR                                  <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row><cell lang=war>acó, etc., nagsusurát <cell>(I am, etc. writing) <cell lang=war>camí, etc. nanunurát <cell>(we are, etc. writing)

<row><cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST

<row><cell lang=war>acó, etc. nagsurát <cell>(I was, etc. writing) <cell lang=war>camí etc. nanurát <cell>(we were, etc. writing)

<row><cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE

<row><cell lang=war>acó, etc. magsusurát <cell>(I shall, etc. be writing) <cell lang=war>camí, etc., manunurát <cell>(we shall, etc. be writing)

<row><cell cols=4 rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<row><cell lang=war>pagsurát icao <cell>(be writing)          <cell lang=war>panurát quita, camó <cell>(let us, you be writing)
<row><cell lang=war>magsurát hiya <cell>(let him or her be writing)     <cell lang=war>manurát camí, hirá <cell>(let us, them be writing)

<row><cell cols=4 rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<row><cell lang=war>acó etc<corr>.</corr> magsurát <cell>(I may, etc. be writing) <cell lang=war>camí, etc. manurát <cell>(we may, etc. be writing)
</table>


<pb id=pb68 n=68>
<table id=tb68.1>
<head>TABLE 3</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi>Primitive direct passive</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive
<row><cell>Present, and gerund:     <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;A</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PANG&mdash;A, PAM&mdash;A, PAN&mdash;A</hi>, <hi>p</hi>
<row><cell>Past participle:         <cell><hi rend=asc>IN&mdash;</hi>, or &mdash;<hi rend=asc>IN&mdash;</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative
<row><cell>Present:                 <cell><hi rend=asc>IN</hi>(d)&mdash;, or &mdash;<hi rend=asc>IN</hi>(d)&mdash;
<row><cell>Past:                    <cell><hi rend=asc>IN&mdash;</hi>, or &mdash;<hi rend=asc>IN&mdash;</hi>.
<row><cell>Future:                  <cell>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;ON</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>&mdash;A</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>&mdash;ON</hi><corr>.</corr>
</table>


<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>. The present and gerund are determined in singular by the prefix <hi lang=war>pag</hi> and the affix <hi lang=war>á</hi>. <hi lang=war>Pag</hi> is used as in the active voice. The affix <hi lang=war>a</hi> is accented (if the last syllable <corr sic=ef resp=errata>of</corr> the root is accented) and simply appended to the root prefixed by <hi>pag</hi>. This affix is sometimes <hi>ha</hi>. The use of <hi>a</hi> or <hi>ha</hi> follows the same rules established for the use of the affixes <hi>an</hi> and <choice resp=errata><sic><hi>han</hi>d</sic><corr>han</corr></choice> (See page 15 of this book).

<p>In plural the prefixes <hi>pang, pam, pan,</hi> are employed in <corr sic="the " resp=errata></corr>combination with the affix <hi>a</hi>. The said prefixes are used in same way as their similar in the primitive active. (See page 62 of this book).

<p>The past participle is formed by the interfix <hi>in</hi> placed between the first consonant and the first vowel of the root. If this begins with a vowel the <hi>in</hi> is prefixed to the root. As


<table id=tb68.2>
<row><cell>from                      <cell lang=war>&ldquo;cáon&rdquo;<corr sic=","></corr>  <cell>(to eat),     <cell lang=war>quináon  <cell>(eaten)
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>&ldquo;inóm&rdquo;     <cell>(to drink),   <cell lang=war>ininóm   <cell>(<corr sic=drinked resp=errata>drunk</corr>)
</table>


<pb id=pb69 n=69><p><hi>Indicative</hi>.&mdash;Present. This tense is formed by doubling the first syllable of the root and by then placing in it (after doubling the said first syllable) the interfix <hi>in</hi>, in a similar way as in the past participle. (See the preceding observution). As,

<table id=tb69.1>
<row><cell>from                      <cell lang=war>cáon,  <cell lang=war>quinacáon
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>inóm,  <cell lang=war>iníinóm<note n=1 lang=en>See the note on page 63.</note>
</table>

<p><hi>Past</hi>.&mdash;The formation of this tense is exactly the same as that of the past participle seen above.

<p><hi>Future</hi>.&mdash;This tense is formed by doubling the first syllable of the root and appending to it the affix <hi>on</hi>. As


<table id=tb69.2>
<row><cell>from                      <cell lang=war>&ldquo;caón,&rdquo; <cell>cácaónon
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>&ldquo;inóm,&rdquo; <cell>iinomón, contracted iinmon.
</table>


<p><hi>Imperative.</hi>&mdash;The single form of this mode, consists in the root appended by the affix &ldquo;á.&rdquo; It must be observed that this affix &ldquo;á&rdquo; in the imperative bears the idea that the order or command is always directed to the second person or first plural, If such order or command is directed to some other person, not to the second, or first (<foreign lang=war>quitá</foreign>) plural then the subjunctive is used. As


<list>
    <item><foreign lang=war>higugmaá an Dyos</foreign> (love God; <corr sic=litt resp=errata>lit.</corr>: let God be loved by you)
    <item><foreign lang=war>higugmaá ta an catadún&gtilde;an</foreign> (let us love justice; <corr sic=litt resp=errata>lit.</corr>: let justice be loved by us).
    <item><foreign lang=war>higugmaón nira an igcasitáuo</foreign> (let them love the fellow-man: <corr sic=litt resp=errata>lit.</corr>: let the fellowman be loved by them).
</list>

<p>The last form is also frequently used for the second person, singular and plural, and for the first person, plural. As


<list lang=war>
    <item>higugmaón mo an Dyos <foreign lang=en>(love God)</foreign>
    <item>higugmaón niyo, etc.
    <item>higugmaón námon, etc.
    <item>higugmaón ta, etc.
</list>


<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>. The single form of this mode consists in <pb id=pb70 n=70>the root appended by the affix <hi>on</hi>, as it is seen in the preceding examples.


<p>Example:

<p rend=center>Root: surát

<p rend=center><hi><corr sic=Indicative resp=errata>Infinitive</corr></hi>

<table id=tb70.1>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagsuratá <cell rows=2>}
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to be written, being written).
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>panuratá
</table>


<p>Past participle: sinurát (written)

<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb70.2>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell cols=2>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. sinúsurat <cell>(I am, etc. written)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. sinúsurat <cell>(we are, etc. written)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. sinurát <cell>(I was, etc. written)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. sinurát <cell>(we were, etc written)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. susuratón <cell>(I shall, etc. be written)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. susuratón <cell>(we shall, etc be written)
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p>suratá acó, icáo, hiyá, camí, quitá, camó, hírá (let me, thee, you, him, her, us, you them he written by you)

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb70.3>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc<corr sic=",">.</corr> suratón     <cell>(I may, etc. written)
    <cell lang=war>camú, etc. suratón    <cell>(we may, etc. be written)
</table>

<milestone unit=tb>


<table id=tb70.4>
<head>TABLE 4.</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi>Progressive direct passive.</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive.
<row><cell>Present, and gerund: <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;A</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PANG&mdash;A, PAM&mdash;A, PAN&mdash;A</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Past participle:     <cell><hi rend=asc>GUIN&mdash;</hi><corr>, </corr><hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PINA&mdash;, PINAN&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative
<row><cell>Present:             <cell><hi rend=asc>GUIN</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PIN<corr sic=.></corr></hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi rend=asc>PINAN</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>p</hi>.
<pb id=pb71 n=71><row><cell>Past: <cell><hi rend=asc>GUIN&mdash;</hi><corr>, </corr><hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PINA&mdash;, PINAN&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Future:              <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;ON</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;ON</hi>, <hi rend=asc>PAN</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;ON</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;A</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;A, PAN&mdash;A</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;ON</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;ON, PAN&mdash;ON</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
</table>



<p>OBSERVATIONS.

<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>. Present and gerund. The singular is formed by the root prefixed by <hi lang=war>pag</hi> and affixed by <hi>a</hi>. In plural the prefixes <hi lang=war>pa, pan,</hi> or <hi lang=war>pang</hi> are employed in the same cases as those mentioned for the use of <hi lang=war>nang nam,</hi> and <hi lang=war>na</hi> of the present tense, indicative, of the progressive form, active voice.<note n=1>See page 65 <hi>et. seq</hi>.</note>

<p>The past participle is formed by the prefix <hi lang=war>guin</hi> added to the root.

<p><hi>Indicative</hi>. Present. In singular the first syllable is doubled,<note n=2>It is not doubled some places, See note on page 65.</note> and the prefix <hi lang=war>guin</hi> is employed.

<p>In plural the prefix <hi lang=war>pina</hi> is used and the root is transformed exactly in the same way as the plural, present tense, indicative; of the progressive form active voice.<note n=3>See page 64 <hi>et seq</hi>.</note>

<p>Past. The same as the present, except in that the first syllable of the root transformed is not doubled.

<p>Future. Its singular is formed by the prefix <hi lang=war>pag</hi>, added to the root whose first syllable is doubled,<note n=4>It is not doubled some localities. See note on page 65.</note> and by the affix <hi>on</hi>.

<p>Its plural is formed by the prefix <hi lang=war>pa, pang</hi> or <hi lang=war>pam</hi> and the root transformed in the same way as in the use of <hi lang=war>na nang</hi> or <hi lang=war>nam</hi> and as the trasformation of the root in the plural, present tense, indicative of the progressive form, active voice.<note n=5>See page 61.</note>

<pb id=pb72 n=72><p><hi>Imperative</hi>. It consists in the root prefixed by <hi lang=war>pag</hi> and affixed by <hi>a</hi>. We reproduce here the observation made on the imperative, primitive form, direct passive.<note n=1>See page 65.</note>

<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>. Its singular is formed by the root prefixed by <hi lang=war>pag</hi> and affixed by <hi lang=war>on</hi>. Its plural consists in the use of <hi lang=war>pa pang</hi> or <hi lang=war>pam</hi> in the same way as in the plural, present tense indicative, progressive form, active voice,<note n=2>See page 68.</note> and of the affix <hi>on</hi>.


<p>Example:

<p rend=center>Root: surát


<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>

<table id=tb72.1>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagsurátá <cell rows=2>}
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to be written, being written)
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>panuratá
</table>


<p>Past participle: guiusurát s.; pinanunurát p. (written).


<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb72.2>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell cols=2>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. guinsusurát <cell>(I am, etc. being written)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. pinanunurát <cell>(we are, etc. being written)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. guinsurát <cell>(I was, etc. being written)
    <cell lang=war>camí etc. pinanurát <cell>(we were, etc. being written)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. pagsusuratón <cell>(I shall be, etc. being written)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. panunuratón <cell>(we shall be, etc. being written)
</table>


<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p>Pagsuratá acó, icao, hiya, camí, hira (let me, you, him or her, us, you, them be being written).

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb72.3>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. pagsuratón <cell>(I may be, etc. being written)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. panuratón <cell>(we may be, etc. being written)
</table>



<pb id=pb73 n=73><table id=tb73.1>
<head>TABLE 5</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi>Primitive indirect passive</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive.
<row><cell>Present, and gerund:     <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;I</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;I, PAN&mdash;I, PANG&mdash;I</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Past participle:         <cell><hi rend=asc>&mdash;IN&mdash;AN</hi>, or <hi rend=asc>IN&mdash;AN</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative.
<row><cell>Present:     <cell><hi rend=asc>IN</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, or <hi rend=asc>&mdash;IN</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>
<row><cell>Past:        <cell><hi rend=asc>&mdash;IN&mdash;AN</hi>, or <hi rend=asc>IN&mdash;AN</hi>
<row><cell>Future:      <cell>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi rend=asc>&mdash;I</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>
</table>



<p>OBSERVATION:

<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>. Present and gerund. This form consists in the root transformed by the affix <hi lang=war>i</hi>, and by the prefix <hi lang=war>pag</hi> in singular, and <hi lang=war>pang, pan,</hi> or <hi lang=war>pa</hi> in plural, according to the rules above established for the use of these prefixes.<note n=1>See page 62 <hi>et seq</hi>.</note>

<p>Past participle,&mdash;This form consists in the root transformed by the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi> and the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi>. The use of the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi> follows the same rules as those hereinbefore established for the said interfix.<note n=2>See page 68.</note>

<p><hi>Indicative</hi>.&mdash;Present. This tense is determined by doubling the first syllable of the root, and then (after the said first syllable being doubled) by placing the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi> between the first consonant and the first vowel of the root. If the root begins with a vowel, the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi> is prefixed to the root whose first syllable has been already doubled.

<pb id=pb74 n=74><p><hi>Past</hi>.&mdash;This tense has the same form as the past participle.

<p><hi>Future</hi>.&mdash;The form of this tense consists in doubling the first syllable of the root and by appending to it the affix <hi>an</hi>.

<p><hi>Imperative</hi>. Its form consists in the root appended by the affix <hi>i</hi>.

<p>The same observation is made here, as that on the imperative of the primitive direct passive.<note n=1>See page 69.</note>

<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>. It&apos;s form is the root appended by the affix <hi>an</hi>.

<p>Example:

<p rend=center>Root: surát


<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>


<table id=tb74.1>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagsuratí <cell rows=2>}
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to be addressed with a letter, being addressed with <corr>a </corr>letter)<note n=2>The translation made in those conjugations is <corr sic=litteral>literal</corr>. We try to express in English the exact idea contained in these forms.</note>
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>panuratí
</table>

<p>Past participle: sinuratán (addressed with a letter)


<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb74.2>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell cols=2>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. sinusuratán <cell>(I am, etc. addressed with a letter)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. sinusuratán <cell>(we are, etc. addressed with a letter)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. sinuratán <cell>(I was, etc. addressed with a letter)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. sinuratán <cell>(we are, etc. addressed with a letter)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. susuratán <cell>(I shall be, etc. addressed with a letter)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. susuratán <cell>(we shall be, etc. addressed with a letter)
</table>


<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p>uratí acó, icáo, hiyá, camí, quita, camó, hirá (let me, thee, you, him, her, us, you, them be addressed with a letter)

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb74.3>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. suratán <cell>(I may be, etc. addressed with a letter)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. suratán <cell>(we may be, etc. addressed with a letter)
</table>



<pb id=pb75 n=75>
<table id=tb75.1>
<head>TABLE 6.</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi>Progressive indirect passive</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive
<row><cell>Present and gerund:  <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;I</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PAN&mdash;I, PAN&mdash;I, PANG&mdash;I</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Past participle:     <cell><hi rend=asc>GUIN&mdash;AN</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative
<row><cell>Present:             <cell><hi rend=asc>GUIN</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PINA</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi rend=asc>PINAN</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi rend=asc>PINANG</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Past:                <cell><hi rend=asc>GUIN&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PINA&mdash;AN, PINAN&mdash;AN, PINANG&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Future:              <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>s</hi>: <hi rend=asc>PA</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi rend=asc>PAN</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi rend=asc>PANG</hi>(d)<hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;I</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;I, PAN&mdash;I, PANG&mdash;I</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;AN</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;AN, PAN&mdash;AN, PANG&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
</table>



<p>OBSERVATIONS.

<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>.&mdash;Present, and gerund. Their single form is the same as their corresponding primitive form indirect passive.

<p>Past participle. It is distinguished by the prefix <hi lang=war>guin</hi>.

<p><hi>Indicative</hi>.&mdash;Present, singular. The first syllable of the root is doubled<note n=1>See note on page 65.</note> and the affix <hi lang=war>guin</hi> added. Its plural is formed as its corresponding in the progressive direct passive, except in that here the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi> is added.<note n=2>See page 70 <hi>et seq</hi>.</note>

<p><hi>Past.</hi>&mdash;The forms of this tense are the same as those of their corresponding form in the progressive direct passive, except in that here the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi> is added.<note n=3>See page 71.</note>

<pb id=pb76 n=76><p><hi>Future</hi>.&mdash;The same as that of the progressive direct passive, except in that the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi> is used here instead of <hi>on</hi>.

<p><hi>Imperative</hi>.&mdash;The same as that of the progressive direct passive, except in that the affix <hi lang=war>i</hi> is used here instead of <hi lang=war>a</hi>.

<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>&mdash;Also the same as that of the progressive direct passive, except in that the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi> is here used instead of <hi lang=war>on</hi>.

<p>Example:


<p rend=center>Root: surát

<p rend=center><hi><corr sic=Indicative resp=errata>Infinitive</corr></hi>

<table id=tb76.1>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagsuratí <cell rows=2>}
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>panuratí
</table>

<p>Past participle: guinsurát

<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb76.2>
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell>SINGULAR
    <cell>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. guinsusuratán
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. pinanunuratán
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. guinsuratán
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. pinanunuratán
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. pagsusuratán
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. panunuratán
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p lang=war>pagsuratí acó, icáo, hiyá, camí, quitá, camó, hirá

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb76.3>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. pagsuratán
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. panuratán
</table>



<table id=tb76.4>
<head>TABLE 7</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi>Primitive instrumental passive</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive.
<row><cell>Present, and gerund: <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;AN</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;AN, PAN&mdash;AN, PANG&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Past participle:     <cell><hi rend=asc>I&mdash;IN&mdash;, IIN&mdash;</hi>
<pb id=pb77 n=77><row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative
<row><cell>Present:     <cell><hi rend=asc>I&mdash;IN</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi rend=asc>IIN</hi>(d)&mdash;
<row><cell>Past:        <cell><hi rend=asc>I&mdash;IN&mdash;, IIN&mdash;</hi>
<row><cell>Future:      <cell><hi rend=asc>I</hi>(d)&mdash;
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>I&mdash;</hi>
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>&mdash;AN</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>I&mdash;</hi>
</table>



<p>OBSERVATIONS:

<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>, Present, and gerund. The same observation is made as that on the same tenses of the primitive, active, with the addition that here the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi> is appended to the root.

<p>Past participle. It is formed by the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi> and the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi>. If the root commences with a vowel, the prefix and <corr resp=errata>the </corr>interfix are joined, as

<p>from &ldquo;arò&rdquo; (to ask), iinarò.

<p><hi>Indicative</hi>.&mdash;Present, past. They are the same as the present and past tenses indicative of the primitive direct passive, with the addition of the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi>.<corr sic=" (1)"></corr>

<p><hi>Future</hi>.&mdash;It is formed by doubling the first syllable of the root and by using the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi>. As

<p lang=war rend=center>isusurát, iaaro.

<p><hi>Imperative.</hi>&mdash;The first form consists in prefixing to the root the particle <hi lang=war>i</hi>. The second form consists in affixing to the root the particle <hi lang=war>an</hi>.

<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>. It consists in prefixing to the root the particle <hi lang=war>i</hi>.

<p>NOTE.&mdash;The instrumental passive is also employed to express substitution; as when we say in English:

<pb id=pb78 n=78><p>Read this word for me: <foreign lang=war>ibása acó hiní n&gtilde;a polon&gtilde;</foreign> (<corr sic=litteraly resp=errata>literally</corr>: let me be substituted by you in reading this word).

<p>Example:

<p rend=center>Root: surát

<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>

<table id=tb78.1>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagsuratán <cell rows=2>}
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to be used in writing, being used in writing)
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>panuratán
</table>

<p>Past participle: isinurát: used in writing

<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb78.2>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell cols=2>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. isinusurát <cell>(I am, etc. used in writing)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. isinusurát <cell>(we are, etc. <corr sic=being>used in</corr> writing)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. isinurát <cell>(I was, etc. used in writing)
    <cell lang=war>camí<corr>,</corr> etc. isinurát <cell>(we are, etc. used in writing)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. isusurát <cell>(I shall etc. be, used in writing)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. isusurát <cell>(we shall etc. be, used in writing)
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p>isurát or suratán acó, icao, hiya, camí, quitá, camó hira (let me, thee, you, him, her, us, you, them be used in writing).

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb78.3>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. isurát <cell>(I may etc. be<corr>,</corr> used in writing)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. isurát <cell>(we may etc. be, used in writing)
</table>



<table id=tb78.4>
<head>TABLE 8.</head>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center><hi><corr sic="Progressive indirect passive" resp=errata>Passive Progressive Instrumental</corr></hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Infinitive
<row><cell>Present and gerund:  <cell><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;AN, PAN&mdash;AN, PANG&mdash;AN</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Past participle:     <cell><hi rend=asc>IGUIN&mdash;</hi>
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Indicative
<row><cell>Present:             <cell><hi rend=asc>IGUIN</hi>(d)&mdash;<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>IPINA</hi>(d)&mdash;<corr>,</corr> <hi rend=asc>IPINAN</hi>(d)&mdash;<corr>,</corr> <hi rend=asc>IPINANG</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>p</hi>.
<pb id=pb79 n=79><row><cell>Past: <cell><hi rend=asc>IGUIN&mdash;</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>IPINA&mdash;, IPINAN&mdash;, IPINANG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Future:              <cell><hi rend=asc>IG</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>s</hi>: <hi rend=asc>IPA</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi rend=asc>IPAN</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi rend=asc>IPANG</hi>(d)&mdash;, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Imperative
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>PAG&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>PA&mdash;AN, PAN&mdash;AN, PANG&mdash;AN</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>IG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>IPA&mdash;, IPAN&mdash;, IPANG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell cols=2 rend=center>Subjunctive
<row><cell cols=2><hi rend=asc>IG&mdash;</hi><corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; <hi rend=asc>IPA&mdash;, IPAN&mdash;, IPANG&mdash;</hi>, <hi>p</hi>.
</table>



<p>OBSERVATIONS:

<p>The observations made on the conjugation of the progressive direct passive are applied to the above conjugation except in that the present, and gerund take the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi>, and that the past participle, the present, and past indicative, and the subjunctive, plural, take the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi>, and in that the imperative has the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi>, and the subjunctive singular the affix <hi lang=war>on</hi>, and the future, imperative, and subjunctive have a <hi lang=war>g</hi> after the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi>.

<p>Example:

<p rend=center>Root: surat

<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>

<table id=tb79.1>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagsuratán
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>panuratán
</table>

<p>Past participle: iguinsurát.

<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb79.2>
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell>SINGULAR
    <cell>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. iguinsusurát.
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. ipinanunurát
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. iguinsurát
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. ipinanurát
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. igsusurát
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. ipanunurat
</table>

<pb id=pb80 n=80><p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p>Pagsaratán or igsarát acó, icáo, hiyá. Panoratán or ipaanrát camí, quitá, camó, hirá.

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb80.1>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. igsurát.
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. ipaaurát.
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.4.3>
<head>NEGATIVE FORMS</head>


<p>These forms consist in employing the adverbs &ldquo;diri&rdquo; before the inflections of the infinitive, present and future indicative, and subjunctive; &ldquo;uaráy&rdquo; before the past indicative, and &ldquo;ayáo&rdquo; before the imperative.

<p>As to the inflections of the root, they are the same as those of the corresponding; affirmative except the past indicative, which always takes the inflections of the imperative.

<p>Example:

<p rend=center><hi>Negative Primitive Active.</hi>

<p rend=center>Root: surát

<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>.

<table id=tb80.2>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>diri pagsurát <cell rows=2>}
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(not to write, not writing)
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>diri panurat
</table>


<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb80.3>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell cols=2>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>diri acó, etc. násurát <cell>(I do not, etc. write)
    <cell lang=war>diri camí, etc. násurát <cell>(we do not, etc. write)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>uaráy acó, etc. surát <cell>(I did not, etc. write)
    <cell lang=war>uaráy camí, etc. surát <cell>(we did not, etc. write)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>diri acó, etc. másarát <cell>(I shall not, etc. write)
    <cell lang=war>diri camí, etc. másurat <cell>(we shall not, etc. write)
</table>


<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p>ayáo surát icáo, quitá<corr>,</corr> camó (let <corr sic="you, us you" resp=errata>you, us</corr> not write)

<p>diri sumurát hiyá, camí, hirá (let him, us, <corr sic=than resp=errata>them</corr> not write)


<pb id=pb81 n=81><p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb81.1>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>diri acó, etc. sumurát <cell>(I may not, etc. write)
    <cell lang=war>diri camí, etc. sumurát <cell>(we may, etc. not write)
</table>


<p>NOTE.&mdash;The past consists sometimes, <corr sic=in resp=errata>among the</corr> primitive forms, in the root having the first syllable doubled; and <corr sic=in resp=errata>among the</corr> progressive forms, it consists in the prefix <hi>pag</hi> and the root whose first syllable is doubled. In plural, the <hi>pag</hi> undergoes the same changes as in the active conjugation.

<p>Examples:

<table id=tb81.1a>
<row><cell lang=war>uaráy acó susurát <cell>(I did not write)
<row><cell lang=war>uaráy acó pagsusurát <cell>(I did not write)
</table>


<p rend=center><hi>Negative Progressive Active.</hi>

<p rend=center>Root: surát

<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>


<table id=tb81.2>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>diri pagsurát <cell rows=2>}
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(not to be writing<corr>,</corr> not<corr sic=","></corr> being writing)
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>diri panurát
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb81.3>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT
<row rend=center>
    <cell cols=2>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>diri acó, etc. nagsusurát <cell>(I am, etc. not writing)
    <cell lang=war>diri camí, etc. nanunurát <cell>(we are, etc. not writing)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell lang=war>uaráy acó etc. pagsurát <cell>(I was etc. not writing)
    <cell lang=war>uaráy camí etc. panurát <cell>(we were etc. not writing)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell lang=war>diri acó etc. magsusurát <cell>(I shall etc. not be writing)
    <cell lang=war>diri camí, etc. manunurát <cell>(we shall not, etc. be writing)
</table>


<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<table id=tb81.4>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>ayao icao pagsurát <cell>(do not be writing)
    <cell lang=war>ayao quitá, camo panurát <cell>(let us, you, not be writing)
<row>
    <cell lang=war>diri hiya magsurát <cell>(let him not be writing)
    <cell lang=war>diri camí, hirá manurát <cell>(let us<corr>,</corr> them not be writing)
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb81.5>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>diri acó, etc. magsurát <cell>(I may, etc. not be writing)
    <cell lang=war>diri camí, etc. manurát <cell>(we may, etc. not be writing)
</table>




<pb id=pb82 n=82>
<div3 id=ch2.1.4.4>
<head>INTERROGATIVE FORMS</head>

<p>They are determined by the phrases &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>cay anó</foreign>&rdquo; (why), and by &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>diín</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>háín</foreign>&rdquo; (where), and by &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>san-o</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>cacan-o</foreign>&rdquo; (when, past and future respectively).


<div4>
<head lang=war>Cay ano</head>

<p>The interrogative conjugation by this phrase simply consists in the regular conjugation of the verb, placing before every inflection the said phrase followed by the particle <hi lang=war>n&gtilde;a</hi>. As


<table id=tb82.1>
<row><cell lang=war>¿cay anó n&gtilde;a nasurat ca?      <cell>(why do you write?)
<row><cell lang=war>¿cay anó n&gtilde;a sinmurát hiya?   <cell>(why did he or she write?)
<row><cell lang=war>¿cay anó n&gtilde;a macadto quita?   <cell>(what shall we go there for?) etc.
</table>


<div4>
<head lang=war>Diin, hain.</head>

<p>The interrogative primitive formed; by these adverbs, has only two inflections: one which consists in the original root, and which is the past tense indicative; and <corr resp=errata>the </corr>other which consists on the same root, its first syllable being doubled; this last form is for the present and future tenses, indicative. These three tenses are the only tenses that this conjugation has. The adverb &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>diín</foreign>&rdquo; is for the present and past tenses. The adverb &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>háin</foreign>&rdquo; is for the future. Thus:

<table id=tb82.2>
<row><cell>Present: <cell lang=war>¿diin acó susurat?            <cell>(<corr sic=wher resp=errata>where</corr> do I write?)
<row><cell>Past:    <cell lang=war><corr>¿</corr>diin ca surát?  <cell>(where did you write?)
<row><cell>Future:  <cell lang=war>¿háin camí susurát?           <cell>(where shall we write?)
</table>


<p>The interrogative progressive only differs from the preceding one in that the particle <hi lang=war>pag</hi> precedes all of the inflections. In plural this <hi lang=war>pag</hi> becomes <hi lang=war>pa</hi>, <hi lang=war>pan</hi>, or <hi lang=war>pang</hi>, according to the same rules laid on the progressive active form.<note n=1>Page 61 of this book.</note> Thus:


<table id=tb82.3>
<row><cell lang=war>¿diín ca pagsusurát?     <cell>(where are you writing?)
<row><cell lang=war>¿háin camó panunurát?    <cell>(where will you be writing?)
</table>

<pb id=pb83 n=83><p>In passive voices, these same forms are followed except in that the root takes the affix <hi lang=war>a</hi> in the direct passive and the affix <hi lang=war>i</hi> in the indirect passive, and the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi> for the primitive form, or the prefix <hi lang=war>ig</hi> for the progressive form, in the instrumental passive. Thus:

<table id=tb83.1>
<row><cell lang=war>¿diín suratá?
<row><cell lang=war>¿diín suratí?, etc.
</table>

<p>NOTE.&mdash;Instead of the prefix <hi lang=war>ig</hi> or <hi lang=war>i</hi>, in the instrumental passive, the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi> is frequently employed. As


<p rend=example><foreign lang=war>¿diín susuratán?</foreign> for <foreign lang=war>¿diín isusurát?</foreign> etc.



<div4>
<head lang=war>Cacan-o san-o</head>

<p>&ldquo;<foreign lang=war>Cacan-o</foreign>&rdquo; is placed before the past indicative; &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>san-o</foreign>&rdquo; is used before the future, indicative. <corr sic=There resp=errata>They</corr> are the only two tenses of this kind of conjugation. As to the inflections in the primitive form, the past is simply the root, and the future is the root, whose first two letters are doubled. As

<table id=tb83.2>
<row><cell lang=war>¿cacan-o camo surat? <cell>(when did you write?)
<row><cell lang=war>¿san-o ca cácanhi?   <cell>(when will you <corr sic=came resp=errata>come</corr>?)
</table>

<p>In the progressive form the root takes the prefixes <hi lang=war>pag</hi> for the singular and <hi lang=war>pa, pan, pang</hi> in plural.

<p>In the passive, the affix <hi lang=war>a</hi> is used in the direct passive; the affix <hi lang=war>i</hi>, in the indirect passive; and the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi> or <hi lang=war>ig</hi> in the instrumental. These prefixes are frequently replaced by the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi>. Examples:

<table id=tb83.3>
<row><cell lang=war>¿cacan-o surata?
<row><cell lang=war>¿Ban-o susuratí? etc
</table>


<p>IMPORTANT OBSERVATION. The verb referred to by any adverb of time <corr sic=take resp=errata>takes</corr> the same form, as to the indicative, as the adverbs <hi lang=war>cacan-o</hi> and <hi lang=war>san-o</hi>. As


<table id=tb83.4>
<row><cell lang=war>buás acó cacanhi             <cell>(tomorrow I shall come)
<row><cell lang=war>canina han ága acó pagsurát  <cell>(this morning I have written)<note n=1>The future of this form is the same as in the regular Tagalog form, where it is said <hi lang=tl>susulat aco</hi> (I shall write), <hi lang=tl>bucas aco susulat</hi> (tomorrow I shall write).</note>
</table>





<pb id=pb84 n=84>
<div3 id=ch2.1.4.5>
<head>SUPPLETORY VERBS</head>

<div4>
<head>Irregular conjugation</head>

<p>The suppletory verbs in Bisayan are those formed by the pronouns &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>iní</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>adí</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>itó</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>itón</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>adtó</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>adtón</foreign>&rdquo;; to supply the English &ldquo;to be&rdquo;, and those formed by the adverbs &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>dinhi</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>didi</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>dida</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>dídton</foreign>&rdquo;, <corr>&ldquo;</corr><foreign lang=war>díthon</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>dídto</foreign>&rdquo;, to supply the same verb &ldquo;to be&rdquo; and also the verbs &ldquo;to come&rdquo;, and &ldquo;to go.&rdquo; Of these verbs we call pronominal those derived from pronouns, and adverbial those derived form adverbs.



<div4 id=ch2.1.4.5.1>
<head>PRONOMINAL FORM.</head>

<p>This is a defective form, as it has only one inflection which consists in doubling the first vowel it being for the present tense, indicative mood. Ex.:


<table id=tb84.1>
<row><cell lang=war>iini acó     <cell>(I am here)
<row><cell lang=war>aadí camí    <cell>(we are here)
<row><cell lang=war>iito hiya    <cell>(he or she is there)
<row><cell lang=war>iiton hira   <cell>(they are there)
<row><cell lang=war>aadto ca     <cell>(you are there)
<row><cell lang=war>aadton camo  <cell>(you are there)
</table>


<p>NOTE. In same places of Leyte, as Dulag, these forms are not used but instead of them, the pronouns are doubled as: <foreign lang=war>iniini, adiadi, itoito</foreign>, etc.

<p>In using these forms it is preferable to have the pronouns <corr sic="postponed to" resp=errata>follow</corr> them.



<div4 id=ch2.1.4.5.2>
<head><corr sic=ALVERBIAL resp=errata>ADVERBIAL</corr> FORM.</head>

<p>This conjugation is common to the adverbs <hi lang=war>dínhi, didí, didto, dithon, didto.</hi>


<p rend=center>Root: dinhi (here)

<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>

<table id=tb84.2>
<row>
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>Present, and gerund
    <cell rows=2>{ <cell>singular: <cell lang=war>pagdinhi <cell rows=2>}
    <cell rows=2 rend=vam>(to be here, being here)
<row>
    <cell>plural: <cell lang=war>paninhi
</table>

<pb id=pb85 n=85><p><hi>Indicative</hi>

<table id=tb85.1>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT, AND FUTURE
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. aanhi or hahaní <cell>(I am, etc. shall be, etc. here)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. aanhi or hahani <cell>(we are, etc. shall be, etc. here)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>Imperfect past, and past.
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. didinhi or nacanhi <cell>(I was, etc. here)
    <cell lang=war>camí etc. didinhi or nacanhi <cell>(we were, etc. here)
</table>

<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

<p rend=center>dinhi icao, etc. (be here, etc).

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

<table id=tb85.2>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>acó, etc. maanhi or mahani <cell>(I may etc. be here)
    <cell lang=war>camí, etc. maanhi or mahani <cell>(we may, etc. be here)
</table>




<div3 id=ch2.1.4.6>
<head>OBSERVATIONS.</head>

<p><hi>Infinitive</hi>.&mdash;Present and gerund. Here the particles <hi lang=war>pag</hi> and <hi lang=war>pan</hi> are employed in the same way as among the primitive active voice<note n=1>See page 61.</note>. As


<table id=tb85.3 lang=war>
<row role=label lang=en><cell>SINGULAR       <cell>PLURAL
<row><cell>pagdinhi       <cell>paninhi
<row><cell>pagdidí        <cell>panidí
<row><cell>pagdidâ        <cell>panidâ
<row><cell>pagdidton      <cell>panidton
<row><cell>pagdithon      <cell>panithon
<row><cell>pagdidto       <cell>panidto.
</table>

<p><hi>Indicative</hi>.&mdash;Present and future. It is formed by replacing the first two letters of the root with the prefix <hi>a</hi> doubled. As

<table id=tb85.4 lang=war>
<row><cell lang=en>from  <cell>dinhi  <cell>aanhi,
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didí   <cell>aadí
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didâ   <cell>aadâ
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didton <cell>aadton
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>dithon <cell>aathon
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didto  <cell>aadto
</table>

<pb id=pb86 n=86><p>NOTE.&mdash;The form <hi lang=war>hahani</hi> is the transformation of <hi lang=war>aanhi</hi>, where the <hi>h</hi> is doubled and transposed by placing <corr sic=cach resp=errata>each</corr> <hi>h</hi> <corr sic=befere resp=errata>before</corr> each <hi>a</hi>. The other pronouns have not such a form.

<p>Imperfect past and past. Their single form consists in doubling the first two letters of the root, as


<table id=tb86.1 lang=war>
<row><cell lang=en>from <cell>dinhi  <cell>dídinhi
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didi   <cell>dídidi
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didâ   <cell>dididâ
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didton <cell>dídidton
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>dithon <cell>dídíthon
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didto  <cell>dídidto<note n=2 lang=en>In Dúlag and other places of Leyte, the accent is transposed to the penult. So it is said: <hi lang=war>dididâ</hi>, etc.</note>
</table>

<p><hi>Imperative</hi>.&mdash;It simply consists in the root.

<p><hi>Subjunctive</hi>.&mdash;It has two forms. The first consists in in prefixing to the root the particle <hi>ma</hi>; the second form consists in replacing the first two letters of the root with the prefix <hi>maa</hi>. As

<table id=tb86.2 lang=war>
<row><cell lang=en>from <cell>dinhi,  <cell>madínhi,  <cell>maánhi
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didí.   <cell>madidí,   <cell>maadí
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didâ,   <cell>madidâ    <cell>maadâ
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didton, <cell>madidton, <cell>mandton
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>dithon, <cell>madithon, <cell>maathon
<row><cell><seg copyOf=from>,,</seg> <cell>didto,  <cell>madidto,  <cell>maadto.
</table>

<p>NOTE&mdash;The form <hi lang=war>mahani</hi> is a transformation of <hi lang=war>maanhi</hi> like <hi lang=war>hahani</hi> of <hi lang=war>aanhi</hi>.

<p>The verbs that supply the English &ldquo;to come&rdquo; and &ldquo;to go&rdquo; are conjugated as <corr sic=ordinaryly resp=errata>ordinarily</corr>. But they have a basis for conjugation, derived from the original root, and which we call <hi>conjugational root</hi>. So from the original roots

    <p rend=example lang=war>dinhi, didí, didá, didton, dithon, didto,

<p rend=noindent>we have the corresponding conjugational roots:

    <p rend=example lang=war>cánhi, cadi, cadá, cadton, cathon, cádto.

<pb id=pb87 n=87><p>The form followed in this conjugation is that of a primitive. Thus from the root &ldquo;canhi&rdquo;, we have:

<p>Infinitive, present and <corr sic=preseut resp=errata>present</corr> participle: pagcanhi (to come, coming)

<p>NOTE.&mdash;But the plural of this tense is irregular. It is

<p rend=example>pagpacánhi (to come, coming, plural).

<table id=tb87.1>
<row><cell><seg id=ind>Indicative</seg> <cell>present: <cell lang=war>acó, etc<corr>.</corr>, nácanhi.
<row><cell><seg copyOf=ind> ,, </seg>   <cell>past:    <cell lang=war>acó, etc<corr>.</corr>, quinmánhi.
<row><cell><seg copyOf=ind> ,, </seg>   <cell>future:  <cell lang=war>acó, etc<corr>.</corr>, mácanhi.
</table>

<p>Imperative: <foreign lang=war>cánhi</foreign>, etc.

<p>Subjunctive: <foreign lang=war>acó, etc. cumánhi</foreign>.


<p>NOTE. The past, indicative, and the present, subjunctive, have the irregular forms, <hi>nacanhi</hi> and <hi>macanhi</hi> respectively, which must not be confounded with <corr resp=errata>the </corr>present and future, indicative, as the accent of the former in past and subjunctive is on the penult and not on the first syllable as in the present and future indicative.



<div3>
<head>Observation.</head>

<p>We have seen that when the verb &ldquo;to be&rdquo; refers to a place it is frequently expressed in Bisayan either, by the pronominal form or by the adverbial form.

<p>But when the verb &ldquo;to be&rdquo; is equivalent to the Spanish &ldquo;<foreign lang=es>estar</foreign>&rdquo;, i.e., when it represents state, situation, or <corr sic=contigent resp=errata>contingent</corr> condition, it is then expressed by the particles <hi lang=war>pag, nag, ma, na</hi> added to the words which are predicate of &ldquo;to be&rdquo; in English. As


<p>I shall be sorry: <foreign lang=war>magmamabidò acó</foreign>.


<p>In cases where the verb &ldquo;to be&rdquo; needs to be represented by an independent word, the expressions &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>amo</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>asya</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>asáy</foreign>&rdquo;, &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>say</foreign>&rdquo; (which express identity, rather than a mere essence, substance or existence) are frequently employed. As


<pb id=pb88 n=88><p><table id=tb88.1>
<row>
    <cell rows=4 rend=vam>Peter is the owner of this house <cell rows=4>{
    <cell lang=war>Hi Pedro ámo an tag-iya hiní n&gtilde;a baláy
<row>
    <cell lang=war>hi Pedro asya an tag-iya, etc.
<row>
    <cell lang=war>hi Pedro asáy <corr sic="tag iya">tag-iya</corr>, etc.
<row>
    <cell lang=war>hi Pedro say tag-iya, etc.
</table>


<p>In other cases, the verb &ldquo;to be&rdquo; is not translated into Bisayan. As


    <p rend=example>God is omnipotent: <foreign lang=war>an Dyos macagagáhum</foreign>.



<div3 id=ch2.1.4.7>
<head>IMPERSONAL VERBS</head>

<p>The impersonal verbs follow the two forms: primitive, and progressive.

<p>Owing to the fact that the Bisayan tongue has indirect and instrumental passive, all of the verbs, no matter to what class they belong, have passive voice. So the intransitive verbs of other languages have passive voice in Bisayan, The same thing happens to the impersonal verbs. They have indirect and instrumental passives which are complete in their conjugation.

<p>Thus, in passive, there is no impersonal verb in Bisayan. The forms of conjugation of this kind of verbs are the same as those of the regular verbs.


<p>Examples:

<table id=tb88.2>
<row><cell lang=war>nagdadalogdog    <cell>(it thunders)
<row><cell lang=war>nagiinuran       <cell>(it rains persistently)
<row><cell lang=war>inuuranán hirá   <cell>(the <corr sic=rains resp=errata>rain</corr> falls on <corr sic="than; litterally">them; literally</corr>: they are rained)
<row><cell cols=2>etc.
</table>



<div3 id=ch2.1.4.8>
<head>DEFECTIVE VERBS</head>

<p>The following belong to such class: <hi lang=war>may</hi> (to have) which has only, one form.

<table id=tb88.3>
<row><cell lang=war>á    <cell>(no, I do not wish)
<row><cell lang=war>iyá  <cell>(receive it)
<row><cell lang=war>ohò  <cell>(look at it)
</table>


<p><hi lang=war>May</hi> is also used as impersonal and then it means &ldquo;there, is, there was, etc.&rdquo;; conó (he or she says or said; they say or said;&mdash;it is said, it was said)


<pb id=pb89 n=89>

<table id=tb89.1>
<row><cell lang=war>ambót    <cell>(I do not know)
</table>


<p>The English &ldquo;to have&rdquo; is also expressed in Bisayan by the root <hi lang=war>may-adà</hi>, whose irregular conjugation <corr sic="it " resp=errata></corr>as follows:


<p rend=center><hi>Infinitive</hi>

<p>Present, and gerund: <foreign lang=war>pagcaada</foreign> or <foreign lang=war>pagcamay-adà</foreign> (to have)

<table id=tb89.2>
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PRESENT
<row>
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>SINGULAR
    <cell cols=2 rend=center>PLURAL
<row>
    <cell>acó, etc. may ada or nagcacaada. <cell>(I etc. have)
    <cell>camí, etc. may adá or nangagcacaada <cell>(we, etc. have)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>PAST
<row>
    <cell>acó, etc. nagcaada <cell>(I, etc. had<corr>)</corr>
    <cell>camí, etc. nangagcaada <cell>(we, etc. had)
<row>
    <cell cols=4 rend=center>FUTURE
<row>
    <cell>acó etc. magcacadá <cell>(I shall, etc. have)
    <cell>camí, etc. mangacacaada <cell>(we shall, etc. have)
</table>


<p rend=center><hi>Imperative</hi>

    <p rend=example lang=war>pacaadá

<p rend=center><hi>Subjunctive</hi>

    <p rend=example lang=war>magcaadá


<p>NOTE 1. The strict meaning <corr sic=os resp=errata>of</corr> the form <hi>may-ada</hi> is &ldquo;to acquire&rdquo;, rather than &ldquo;to have&rdquo;, for which the defective <hi>may</hi> is used.

<p>2. The impersonal and defective <hi>may</hi> is very frequently joined to verbs in passive voice, it keeping its impersonal character. As


    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>May naquita co nga bucad</foreign> (I saw a flower; <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr>: There is a flower seen by me),


<p rend=noindent>its regular order being:


    <p rend=example lang=war>may bucad nga naquíta co.

    <p rend=example><foreign lang=war>May tinagan co hin salapi</foreign> (I gave money to someone; <corr sic=litterally>literally</corr>: there is some one given by me with money);&mdash;where the words &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>tauo nga</foreign>&rdquo; are tacit, the regular form being:

    <p rend=example lang=war>May tauo nga tinagan co hin salapi.




<div3 id=ch2.1.4.9>
<head>OTHER CLASSES OF VERBS</head>

<p>There are other kinds of verbs whose distinguishing character consists in their conjugational roots. They are always <pb id=pb90 n=90>derived from the ordinary verbs, but bear different meaning, <corr sic=altho>although</corr> conjugated as ordinarily.

<p>The conjugational roots in active voice are different from those in passive.

<p>From the original root SURAT we have the following classes:


<div4 id=ch2.1.4.9.1>
<head>ACTIVE VOICE</head>


<p><table id=tb90.1 lang=war>
<row role=label lang=en rend=center><cell><corr sic=Conjngational resp=errata>Conjugational</corr> root       <cell>Indicative Present    <cell>Classes
<row><cell>sinurat                  <cell>nagsisinurat          <cell lang=en>CONTINUATIVE
<row><cell>casurat                  <cell>nacacasurát           <cell lang=en>ABSOLUTE POTENTIAL
<row><cell>cagsurat                 <cell>nacacagsurát          <cell lang=en>RELATIVE POTENTIAL
<row><cell>isusúrat                 <cell>náisusurat            <cell lang=en>ABSOLUTE APTATIVE
<row><cell>ipagsusúrat              <cell>náipagsusurat         <cell lang=en>RELATIVE APTATIVE
<row><cell>pagpasurát               <cell>nápasurát             <cell lang=en>ABSOLUTE PERMISSIVE
<row><cell>papagsúrat               <cell>napapagsurát          <cell lang=en>RELATIVE PERMISSIVE
<row><cell>papágsurat               <cell>pinasusurát           <cell lang=en>ABSOLUTE IMPERATIVE
<row><cell>papagsurát               <cell>pinapagsurát          <cell lang=en>RELATIVE IMPERATIVE
<row><cell>susúrat                  <cell>nasusúrat             <cell lang=en>IMPREMEDITATIVE
<row><cell>suratsúrat               <cell>nasuratsúrat          <cell lang=en>ABSOLUTE DIMINUTIVE
<row><cell>suratsurát               <cell>nágsusuratsúrat       <cell lang=en>RELATIVE DIMINUTIVE
<row><cell>suratsurát               <cell>násuratsurát          <cell lang=en>ABSOLUTE REPETITIVE
<row><cell>suratsurát               <cell>nagsusuratsurát       <cell lang=en>RELATIVE REPETITIVE
<row><cell>pasuratsúrat             <cell>nagpapasuratsurat     <cell lang=en>RECIPROCATE

<row><cell cols=3 lang=en>From the original root &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>hadì</foreign>,&rdquo; we have

<row><cell>pacahádi                 <cell>napacaháhì            <cell lang=en>IMITATIVE

<row><cell cols=3 lang=en>From the original root &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>buság</foreign>,&rdquo; we have

<row><cell>pagticabusag             <cell>náticabusag          <cell lang=en>ABSOLUTE GRADUAL
<row><cell>pagticabusag             <cell>nagtiticabusag        <cell lang=en>RELATIVE GRADUAL

<row><cell cols=3 lang=en>From the original root &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>sayáo</foreign><corr>,</corr>&rdquo; we have

<row><cell>sayáo                    <cell>nagsasayáo             <cell lang=en>FIGURATIVE
</table>


<p>As it may be observed above, one original root may give a great number of different classes of verbs, as the nature of the root and use may permit. The subdivision <pb id=pb91 n=91><hi>absolute</hi> and <hi>relative</hi> of these classes corresponds exactly to the primitive and progressive forms already explained.

<p>The continuative is distinguished, in its conjugational root, by the interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi> and it expresses persistence of the action. As

<table id=tb91.1>
<row><cell lang=war>nagtitinóoc an batà <cell>(the child is crying persistently)
</table>

<p>The potential is determined, in its conjugational roots, by the prefix <hi lang=war>paca</hi> or <hi lang=war>pacag</hi> (absolute and relative) and it means ability on the part of the subject to execute the action expressed by the original root. As

<table id=tb91.2>
<row><cell lang=war>dirì hiyá nacacasurát, cay dirí maaram       <cell>(he cannot write, because does not know how to)
<row><cell lang=war>dirì hiyá nacacagsurát, cay damò in buhat    <cell>(he cannot write, because he is busy)
</table>

<p>The optative has, in its conjugational root the prefix <hi lang=war>i</hi> or <hi lang=war>ipag</hi> (absolute and relative), and it represents the idea of desire. The absolute means a desire about to be executed; the relative signifies a mere intention; As


<table id=tb91.3>
<row><cell lang=war>náilalacat na hiyá han ac pag-abotá <cell>(he was about to depart when I met him)
<row><cell lang=war>naipagsusurat acó ha imo <cell>(I was intending to write you)
</table>

<p>When the absolute optative bears the particle <hi lang=war>ca</hi>, it expresses then proximate passivity, as

<table id=tb91.4>
<row><cell lang=war>naicahorológ an bun&gtilde;a <cell>(the fruit is about to fall)
</table>

<p>The permissive is distinguished in its conjugational root by the prefix <hi lang=war>pagpa</hi> or <hi lang=war>papag</hi> (absolute and relative) and it means leave <corr sic=of resp=errata>or</corr> abandonment. As

<table id=tb91.5>
<row><cell lang=war>diri hiya napaútang hin salapí <cell>(he does not lend any <corr sic=moneys>money</corr>; <corr sic=litteraly resp=errata>literally</corr>: he does not permit any money to be lent)
</table>

<p>When the original root of this form is a substantive referring to a place, then the idea of &ldquo;going&rdquo; or &ldquo;coming&rdquo; is represented. As

<table id=tb91.6>
<row><cell lang=war>mapa Manila camí <cell>(we shall go to Manila)
<row><cell lang=war>napahorón hi Juan <cell>(John went to the farm)
</table>

<pb id=pb92 n=92><p>The imperative, which means order or command, is determined by the prefix <hi lang=war>papag</hi> and <corr sic="the the" resp=errata>the</corr> interfix <hi lang=war>in</hi>. As

<table id=tb92.1>
<row><cell lang=war>pinacacadto ca <cell>(you are ordered to go there)
<row><cell lang=war>pinapagtoón camo <cell>(you are commanded to study)
</table>

<p>The impremeditative is determined by the repetition of the first syllable of the original root, and expresses a sudden and inconsiderate action. As

<table id=tb92.2>
<row><cell lang=war>náyayácan ca lá <cell>(you talk inconsiderately)
</table>

<p>The formation of the diminutive class follows that of a diminutive noun.<note n=1 id=n92.1>See the page 10.</note> As

<table id=tb92.3>
<row><cell lang=war>nagtatanomtanom cami hin camote <cell>(we are cultivating a little camote)
</table>

<p>The repetitive has the same formation as the diminutive.

<p>The repetitive has the same formation as the diminutive, except in that the accent is always on the last syllable of the repetitive. It follows the formation of the figurative nouns,<note sameAs=n92.1></note> when the root has more than two syllable, or when the last syllable is preceded by more than one consonant or is pronounced separately from the <corr sic=proceding resp=errata>preceding</corr> consonant. The repetitive expresses a repeated action. As

<table id=tb92.4>
<row><cell lang=war>magtatanomtanóm acó hin abacá <cell>(I shall cultivate hemp again)
<row><cell lang=war>macarocánhi acó buás <cell>(I shall come again to-morrow)
</table>

<p>The reciprocate is formed exactly as the diminutive, except in that the <corr sic=recipocrate resp=errata>reciprocate</corr> uses the prefix <hi lang=war>pa</hi>. It means a mutual action. As

<table id=tb92.5>
<row><cell lang=war>nagpapasuratsurat camí <cell>(we are writing to each other)
</table>

<p>It is also formed by the prefixes <hi lang=war>pag</hi> and <hi lang=war>ig</hi>, and the affix <hi lang=war>an</hi>. As &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>pagquítáan</foreign> (to meet), <foreign lang=war>iguinquiquita iguinhihisugat</foreign>&rdquo;. It has a passive character.

<p>The imitative is formed by the prefix <hi lang=war>paca</hi>, the same as the absolute potential, but here the root is always a noun, the object of the imitation. As

<pb id=pb93 n=93><table id=tb93.1>
<row><cell lang=war>hiyá napacamaáram    <cell>(he pretends to be learned)
<row><cell lang=war>hiyá napacacatsilà   <cell>(he affects to be a Spaniard)
</table>

<p>The gradual is determined by the prefix <hi lang=war>pagtica</hi>, and means an action by degrees. As

<table id=tb93.2>
<row><cell lang=war>nagtiticapasò inin adlao <cell>(the day is becoming <corr sic=hatter resp=errata>hotter</corr>)
<row><cell lang=war>nagtiticalamrag an bulan <cell>(the moon is becoming brighter)
</table>

<p>The figurative verb has the same form as its original, except in the accent which is always on the last syllable. As

<table id=tb93.3>
<row><cell lang=war>nagsasayáo hiyá tun&gtilde;ud han caol-ol <cell>(he jumps as if he was dancing, on account of the pain he feels)
</table>



<div4 id=ch2.1.4.9.2>
<head>DIRECT PASSIVE</head>

<div5>
<head>CONTINUATIVE VERB</head>

<p>Conjugational root: sinúrat

<table id=tb93.4>
<row>
    <cell>Infinitive:
    <cell>present and gerund:
    <cell lang=war>pagsinurata <hi>s</hi>; pagpinanuráta <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell rows=3>Indicative:
    <cell>Present:
    <cell lang=war>guinsisinúrat <hi>s</hi>; guinpipinanúrat <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Past:
    <cell lang=war>guinsinúrat <hi>s</hi>; guinpinanurat <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Future:
    <cell lang=war>pagsisinuraton <hi>s</hi>; pagpipinanuraton <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Imperative:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>pagsinuráta <hi>s</hi>; pagpinanuráta <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Subjunctive:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>pagsinuraton <hi>s</hi>; pagpinanuraton <hi>p</hi>.
</table>


<div5>
<head>ABSOLUTE POTENTIAL</head>

<p>Conjugational root: hisurát

<table id=tb93.5>
<row><cell>Infinitive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>paghisurát <hi>s</hi>; panhisurát <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell rows=3>Indicative: <cell>Present: <cell lang=war>nahasusurát
<row>            <cell>Past: <cell lang=war>nahasurát
<row>            <cell>Future: <cell lang=war>mahasusurát
<row><cell>Imperative: <cell cols=2>(no imperative)
<row><cell>Subjunctive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>mahasurát.
</table>



<div5>
<head>RELATIVE POTENTIAL</head>

<p>Conjugational root: hisurát

<table id=tb93.6>
<row><cell>Infinitive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>paghisurát <hi>s</hi>; panhisurát <hi>p</hi>.
<pb id=pb94 n=94><row><cell rows=3>Indicative: <cell>Present: <cell lang=war>nahapapagsurát <hi>s</hi>; nanhihisurát <hi>p</hi>.
<row>            <cell>Past: <cell lang=war>nahapagsurát <hi>s</hi>; nanhisurát <hi>p</hi>.
<row>            <cell>Future: <cell lang=war>mahapapagsurát <hi>s</hi>; manhihisurát <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Imperative: <cell cols=2>(no imperative)
<row><cell>Subjunctive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>mahapagsurát <hi>s</hi>; manhisurát <hi>p</hi>.
</table>



<div5>
<head>ABSOLUTE OPTATIVE</head>

<p>Conjugational root: isusurat

<table id=tb94.1>
<row>
    <cell>Infinitive:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>pag-isusurata <hi>s</hi>; pag-ipanunurata <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell rows=3>Indicative:
    <cell>Present:
    <cell lang=war>guin-iisusurat
<row>
    <cell>Past:
    <cell lang=war>guin-isusurat.
<row>
    <cell>Future:
    <cell lang=war>pag-iisusuraton.
<row>
    <cell>Imperative:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>pagisusurata
<row>
    <cell>Subjunctive:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>pag-isusuráton.
</table>


<div5>
<head>RELATIVE OPTATIVE</head>

<p>Conjugational root: isusúrat

<table id=tb94.2>
<row><cell>Infinitive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>pag-ipagsusurata <hi>s</hi>; pag-ipanunuráta <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell rows=3>Indicative: <cell>Present: <cell lang=war>guin-iipagsusurat, <hi>s</hi>; guin-iipanunurat.
<row>            <cell>Past: <cell lang=war>guin-ipagsusurat <hi>s</hi>; guin-ipanunurat.
<row>            <cell>Future: <cell lang=war>pag-iipagsusuráton <hi>s</hi>; pag-iipanunuraton.
<row><cell>Imperative: <cell cols=2 lang=war>pag-ipagsusurata
<row><cell>Subjunctive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>pag-ipagsusuraton.
<row><cell cols=3>(The permissive verbs have no passive)
</table>


<div5>
<head>ABSOLUTE IMPERATIVE</head>


<p><table id=tb94.3>
<row><cell>Infinitive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>papagsuratán <hi>s</hi>; papanuratán <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell rows=3>Indicative: <cell>Present: <cell lang=war>ipinasusurat.
<row>            <cell>Past: <cell lang=war>ipinasurat.
<row>            <cell>Future: <cell lang=war>ipasusurat.
<row><cell>Imperative: <cell cols=2 lang=war>ipasurát.
<row><cell>Subjunctive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>ipasurát<corr sic=":">.</corr>
</table>



<div5>
<head>RELATIVE IMPERATIVE</head>

<p>Conjugational root: pasurát

<table id=tb94.4>
<row>
    <cell>Infinitive:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>papagsuratán<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; papanuratán<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<pb id=pb95 n=95><row>
    <cell rows=3>Indicative:
    <cell>Present:
    <cell lang=war>ipinápagsurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; ipinápanurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Past:
    <cell lang=war>ipinapagsurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; ipinapanurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Future:
    <cell lang=war>ipápagsurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; ipápanurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Imperative:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>ipapagsurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; ipapanurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell>Subjunctive:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>ipapagsurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; ipapanurát<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
</table>


<div5>
<head>IMPREMEDITATIVE</head>

<p>Conjugational root: susuráta

<table id=tb95.1>
<row>
    <cell>Infinitive:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>pagsusuráta<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; panunuráta<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row>
    <cell rows=3>Indicative:
    <cell>Present:
    <cell lang=war>sinususurat.
<row>
    <cell>Past:
    <cell lang=war>sinusurát.
<row>
    <cell>Future<corr sic=";">:</corr>
    <cell>sususuráton.
<row>
    <cell>Imperative:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>susuráta.
<row>
    <cell>Subjunctive:
    <cell cols=2 lang=war>susuráton.
</table>



<div5>
<head>ABSOLUTE DIMINUTIVE</head>

<p>Conjugational root: sinuratsúrat

<table id=tb95.2>
<row><cell>Infinitive: <cell cols=2>pagsuratsuráta<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; panuratsuráta<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell rows=3>Indicative: <cell>Present: <cell>sinusuratsúrat,
<row>            <cell>Past: <cell>sinuratsúrat.
<row>            <cell>Future: <cell>susuratsuraton.
<row><cell>Imperative: <cell cols=2>suratsurata.
<row><cell>Subjunctive: <cell cols=2>suratsuráton.
</table>



<div5>
<head>RELATIVE DIMINUTIVE</head>

<p>Conjugational root: guinsuratsúrat

<table id=tb95.3>
<row><cell>Infinitive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>pagsuratsuratá<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; panuratsúrata<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell rows=3>Indicative: <cell>Present: <cell lang=war>guinsusuratsurat<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; pinanunuratsurat<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row>            <cell>Past: <cell lang=war>guinsuratsurat<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; pinanuratsurat<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row>            <cell>Future: <cell lang=war>pagsusuratsuraton<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; panunuratsuratón<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Imperative: <cell cols=2 lang=war>pagsuratsuráta<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; panuratsuráta<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>.
<row><cell>Subjunctive: <cell cols=2 lang=war>pasuratsuraton<corr>,</corr> <hi>s</hi>; panusatsuráton<corr>,</corr> <hi>p</hi>
</table>

<milestone unit=tb rend=stars>

<p>(The repetitive have the same form as the diminutive)

<milestone unit=tb rend=stars>

<p>(The reciprocate have no passive)

<milestone unit=tb rend=stars>

<p>(The imitative, gradual and figurative have no passive)




<pb id=pb96 n=96>
<div4 id=ch2.1.4.9.3>
<head>INDIRECT PASSIVE</head>

<p>The indirect passive is similar to the ordinary progressive indirect passive (see page 76), except in that in the continuative form the interfix <hi>in</hi> is used.

<p>The potential have no indirect passive.

<p>The optative have their indirect passive as that of the ordinary form (see page 73 <hi>et seq.</hi>), as to the affixes.

<p>The imperative have no indirect passive.

<p>The impremeditative has its indirect passive the same as that of the primitive indirect passive (see page 74) as to the affixes.

<p>The indirect passive of the diminutive is the same as that of the ordinary, primitive (See page 78 <hi>et seq</hi>) as to the affixes.




<div4 id=ch2.1.4.9.4>
<head>INSTRUMENTAL PASSIVE.</head>

<p>The instrumental passive of the continuative impremeditative and diminutive verbs is similiar to that of the progressive (page 79 and 80) as to the prefixes.

<p>The other verbs above mentioned have not instrumental passive.

<p>NOTE. There are other classes of verbs formed by other particles and combinations; but their conjugation will be of no difficulty if the different forms hereinbefore given are thoroughly mastered.



<div3 id=ch2.1.4.10>
<head>DEPRECATIVE VERBS</head>

<p>There are verbs used in a depreciative <corr sic=tune resp=errata>tone</corr>. Examples.

<table id=tb96.1>
<row><cell>for                      <cell lang=war>cáon  <cell>(to eat)    <cell lang=war>ásoc, lámon, etc.
<row><cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>lacát <cell>(to walk)   <cell lang=war>laág
<row><cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>yacán <cell>(to talk)   <cell lang=war>yaquimbot, etc.
</table>

<p>These verbs are conjugated as ordinarily.





<pb id=pb97 n=97>
<div2 id=ch2.1.5>
<head><corr sic=ADVERB>ADVERBS</corr></head>

<p>The adverbs are of the following classes:

<div3>
<head>ADVERBS OF PLACE</head>

<p>DIIN (where),&mdash;BISAN DIIN (wherever, anywhere),&mdash;DIDI (here, nearer to the speaker then to the listener),&mdash;DINHI (here),&mdash;DIDÂ (there, nearer to the listener than to the speaker),&mdash;DIDTO (there),&mdash;HARANI (near),&mdash;HARAYÒ (far).


<div3>
<head>ADVERBS OF TIME</head>

<p>CACAN-O (when, past),&mdash;SAN-O (when, future),&mdash;BISAN CACAN-O (whenever, past),&mdash;BISANSAN-O (whenever, future),&mdash;NIYÁN (now),&mdash;CANINA (before, short time ago, in the same day),&mdash;CAGAB&apos;I (last night),&mdash;CACOLÓP (yesterday),&mdash;CASANGAB&apos;I (the night before last),&mdash;CASANGCOLOP (the day before yesterday),&mdash;CASANGYADTO (the day previous to the day before yesterday),&mdash;ANAY (before, anciently),&mdash;UNINA (after, in the same day),&mdash;BUAS (to-morrow),&mdash;ISANGBUÁS (the day after to-morrow),&mdash;ISANGYÁDTO (the day following the day after to-morrow),&mdash;CANONAY (always),&mdash;DAYÓ-DAY (persistently),&mdash;LAYON (soon),&mdash;DÁYON (immediately),&mdash;HADTO (then, before),&mdash;N&Gtilde;ANÌ, CUN (when, whenever),&mdash;NAMAN (again),&mdash;LIUAT (again),&mdash;PA (yet),&mdash;NA (already),&mdash;AGSOB (frequently),&mdash;DANAY (sometimes),&mdash;NGÁHAO (then).


<div3>
<head>ADVERBS OF DEGREE</head>

<p>CAPIN, LABIS, LAPÁS (more),&mdash;ORÓG (most),&mdash;URAÚRA (excessively),&mdash;TUMAN (a little scarcely)<corr sic=",">.</corr>


<div3>
<head>ABVERBS OF MANNER</head>

<p>AMO, ASYA (so, thus),&mdash;ONAN-O (how),&mdash;MAN (also),&mdash;COLAÓNG, COLASÓT, COLANTOY (for example, for instance).


<div3>
<head>ADVERBS OF DOUBT</head>

<p>ADÂ, MAHAMOC, MASAGNI, MAHARANI, CADUÁS TIN&Gtilde;ALI, BAN&Gtilde;IN, SABALI (probably, perhaps),&mdash;BAGÁ (as).


<div3>
<head>ADVERBS OF AFFIRMATION</head>

<p>OO (yes),&mdash;MANGUD (indeed),&mdash;CAIYA, UGA, CAY UGÂ, GUI-HÁPON (of course).


<div3>
<head>ADVERBS OF NEGATION</head>

<p>DIRI (no),&mdash;UARAY (no, past),&mdash;AYAO (no, future)<corr sic="&mdash;">.</corr>


<div3>
<head>ADVERBS OF CAUSE</head>

<p>CAY (because),&mdash;TUN&Gtilde;ÚD (because).

<pb id=pb98 n=98><p>OBSERVATIONS 1. Many adjectives and phrases are employed as adverbs, as

<table id=tb98.1>
<row><cell lang=war>igbao                    <cell>(above)
<row><cell lang=war>niyán n&gtilde;a adlao   <cell>(to-day)
<row><cell lang=war>damò                     <cell>(much)
<row><cell cols=2>etc.
</table>

<p>2. Some of the adverbs are frequently contracted, as those composed of &ldquo;bisan&rdquo; which is contracted into &ldquo;bis.&rdquo; Examples:

<table id=tb98.2>
<row><cell lang=war>bisan diín <cell><seg id=ctrct>contracted</seg> <cell lang=war>bis diín
<row><cell lang=war>guihapon   <cell><seg copyOf=ctrct> ,, </seg> <cell lang=war>guiháp.
</table>

<p>3. The adverbs have diminutive, comparative and superlative. As


    <p rend=example>from harani, haraníay, haroharaní, guihaharanií; etc.




<div2 id=ch2.1.6>
<head><corr sic=PREPOSITION>PREPOSITIONS</corr></head>


<p>HA (to, from, over, under),&mdash;TIPA (against, towards),&mdash;TUN&Gtilde;UD (for),&mdash;PATI, UPOD (<corr sic=whith resp=errata>with</corr>),&mdash;GAUÁS (without),&mdash;CAN (of, to),&mdash;TICANG, GUICAN (from, since),&mdash;TUBTUB (up to, till, until),&mdash;TALIUAN (after),&mdash;LÁBUT (except).





<div2 id=ch2.1.7>
<head><corr sic=CONJUNCTION>CONJUNCTIONS</corr></head>


<p>The conjunctions are of the following classes:


<div3>
<head>COPULATIVE</head>


<p>UG, N&Gtilde;AN (and),&mdash;MAN (also),&mdash;N&Gtilde;A (that).


<div3>
<head>DISJUNCTIVE</head>


<p>O, CUN, <note n=1>This conjunction is seldom used, at present, for the disjunctive <hi>or</hi>. The English <hi>or</hi> and the Spanish <hi>o</hi> <corr sic=become>are</corr> difficult to <corr sic="be translated">translate</corr> into Bisayan with <hi>cun</hi>. For this reason the Spanish <hi>o</hi> is frequently employed in Bisayan, as well as in Tagalog for the English <hi>or</hi>.</note> BA (or).


<div3>
<head>ADVERSATIVE</head>


<p>CUNDÌ (but),&mdash;SABALI, UGARING (but, though), CUN, NGANÌ (if),&mdash;BISAN (even, though),&mdash;BACAY (as),&mdash;CUNTÀ (which bears the idea of past or future desire: it may frequently be translated in English with the phrase: &ldquo;if possible&rdquo;).


<pb id=pb99 n=99><div3>
<head>CONDITIONAL</head>


<p>CUN N&Gtilde;ANÌ, ABI,<note n=1>It also conveys the idea of &ldquo;Saying&rdquo;, as in the example: <corr sic="&lsquo;"></corr><foreign lang=war>nasiring an catsila, ngalaong: &ldquo;págame&rdquo;, <hi>abi</hi> tapa: &ldquo;bayari acó&rdquo;</foreign>.</note> UGARING (if).

<p>CAUSAL

<p>CAY, TUNGUD, BACAY, SANGLIT, CAY (inasmuch, because).

<p>FINAL

<p>BASI (in order to),&mdash;BANGIN (lest).

<p>CONTINUATIVE

<p>TACAY (then),&mdash;BUSA (therefore),&mdash;TARA (then).




<div2 id=ch2.1.8>
<head><corr sic=INTERJECTION>INTERJECTIONS</corr></head>


<p><hi rend=sc>Admiration</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡a!, ¡ay!, ¡báá!, ¡abaá!, ¡baadao!, ¡abaadao! ¡pastilan!, ¡pauican!, ¡pauísac!, ¡palipac!, ipalísac!, ¡pauiday!, ¡aguimpauican!, ¡aguimpastilan!, ¡aguimpauisac!, ¡aguimpali, pac!, ¡aguimpalisac!, ¡aguimpauiday!, ¡pascalan!, ¡bongansiso!, !odoy!, ¡alágad!, ¡alagad dao!, ¡an ac pa!, ¡ito ngahao!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Pain and sorrow</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡ay!, ¡ayhay!, ¡aguí!, ¡aroy!, ¡óhoy!, ¡pastilan!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Attention</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡óho!, ¡ohondá!, ¡tabí!, ¡oy!, ¡acay! ¡hacay!, ¡solibangco!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Insistence</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡gad!, ¡daó!, ¡uga!, ¡lugá!, ¡ugaring!, ¡lugaring!, ¡caiyá!, ¡pudó!, ¡haromámay!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Reprobation</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡diri!, ¡uaráy!, ¡ayao!, ¡hulát!, ¡bodó!, ¡buró!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Surprise</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡ay!, ¡an!, ¡alágad!, ¡ús!, ¡balitao!, ¡bayá!</foreign>, etc.<note n=2 lang=en>There is another, viz: <hi lang=war>susmaryosep</hi> or <hi lang=war>susmarosèp</hi> the corrupted Spanish &ldquo;<foreign lang=es>Jesús, María y José</foreign>&rdquo;.</note>

<p><hi rend=sc>Pity</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡cairó!, ¡in tauo!, ¡pastilán!, ¡odóg!, ¡baadao!, ¡aguí!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Desire</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡cunta!, ¡upayda!, ¡unta!, ¡mangad pa!, ¡ihinaotpa!, ¡tubangan pa la!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Joy</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡ay!, ¡ahay!, ¡upayda!, ¡salamat!, ¡ta!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Aversion</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡á!, ¡aguí!, ¡ambot!, ¡sabá!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Invitation</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡cadí!, ¡taná!, ¡halá!</foreign>, etc.

<pb id=pb100 n=100><p><hi rend=sc>Self-correction</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡au!, ¡ay!, ¡sapayán!</foreign>

<p><hi rend=sc>Suspension</hi>: <foreign lang=war>cuan.... inín.... ¡hulat!, ¡niyan!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Despair</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡sahó!</foreign>, etc.

<p><hi rend=sc>Gratitude</hi>: <foreign lang=war>¡salamat!, ¡Dyos mag báyad!, ¡Dyos mag sugá!</foreign>, etc.






<div0 id=pt3>
<head>SYNTAX</head>


<div1 id=ch3.1>
<head>SUBJECTIVE RELATION</head>

<p>The subject of a verb may be either a noun or its equivalent, namely a pronoun, a verb in the infinitive mood, or an entire phrase. As

<table id=tb100.1>
<row><cell lang=war><hi rend=sc>An Dyos</hi> macagagáhum <cell>(God is omnipotent)
<row><cell lang=war><hi rend=sc>Acó</hi> nagsusurát <cell>(I write)
<row><cell lang=war><hi rend=sc>An paguaon</hi> maopay <cell>(The meal is good; <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr>: the eating is good)
<row><cell lang=war><hi rend=sc>An guinquiquinauanglan ta</hi> ámo an pag-orosa <cell>(what we need is union).
</table>


<div1 id=ch3.2>
<head>PREDICATIVE RELATION</head>

<p>The verb agree with its subject in person and number. As

<table id=tb100.2>
<row><cell lang=war>panurát quitá <cell>(let us write)
<row><cell lang=war>magsurát hiyá <cell>(let him or her write)
</table>


<div1 id=ch3.3>
<head>ATTRIBUTIVE RELATION</head>

<p>The nouns and their equivalents may be modified by substantives, adjectives, <corr sic=demonstratives resp=errata>demonstrative</corr> pronouns, possessive pronouns, and participles. Except in cases of possessive pronouns, relative n&gtilde;a is placed between the noun or its equivalents, and the modifying word. As

<table id=tb100.3>
<row><cell lang=war>batá n&gtilde;a sorogóon <cell>(the young servant; <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr>: the boy servant)
<row><cell lang=war>an sangcay n&gtilde;a macpay <cell>(the good friend)
<row><cell lang=war>iní n&gtilde;a baláy <cell>(this house)
<row><cell lang=war>an acon amáy <cell>(my father)
<row><cell lang=war>hinigugma nga iróy <cell>(loved mother)
</table>


<pb id=pb101 n=101><p>NOTE.&mdash;When the pronoun &ldquo;adton&rdquo; and its inflections are equivalent to &ldquo;deceased&rdquo;, &ldquo;late&rdquo;, the particle <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> is not employed. As

<table id=tb101.1>
<row><cell lang=war>adton Pedro <cell>(the late Peter)
</table>

<p>The article also modifies the noun and its equivalents, in that it limits them. The articles always precede the word or words to which they refer. As is seen before (page 9) the personal article is always employed before the proper nouns, except in the vocative case. As

<table id=tb101.2>
<row><cell lang=war>an lan&gtilde;it <cell>(the heaven, or the sky)
<row><cell lang=war>hi Eudong <cell>(Peter)
</table>

<p>The definite article is sometimes used before proper nouns, and frequently before the demonstrative and possessive pronouns. The indefinite article is sometimes employed before the possessive pronouns. The personal article is sometimes used before the personal pronouns, except the third person. As

<table id=tb101.3>
<row><cell lang=war>an Dyos <cell>(God)
<row><cell lang=war>an iní n&gtilde;a batà <cell>(this boy)
<row><cell lang=war>an amon búngto <cell>(our town)
<row><cell lang=war>macanhi in acon sangcay <cell>(a friend of mine will come)
<row><cell lang=war>hi camó n&gtilde;an hi acó <cell>(you and I)
</table>


<div1 id=ch3.4>
<head>COMPLEMENTARY RELATION</head>

<p>The object of the verb is always in the objective case determined by the corresponding article, or by a preposition. As

<table id=tb101.4>
<row><cell lang=war>hi Pedro nagbabasa <hi>han</hi> surat <cell>(Peter reads the letter)
<row><cell lang=war>hirá nan&gtilde;atúrog <hi>ha</hi> sacayán <cell>(they sleep on the boat)
<row><cell lang=war>hi Tomás naruruyag <hi>hin</hi> pagcanhi <cell>(Thomas wishes to come; literally: Thomas wishes a coming)
<row><cell lang=war>mácadto acó <hi>ha</hi> Abúyog <cell>(I shall go to Abuyog).
</table>

<p>The object of the verb <hi>to be</hi> is in the nominative case. As

<table id=tb101.5>
<row><cell lang=war>an imo bahín, amo iní    <cell>(your part is this)
<row><cell lang=war>an táuo mamarátyon       <cell>(the man is mortal)
</table>



<pb id=pb102 n=102>
<div1 id=ch3.5>
<head>ADVERBIAL RELATION</head>


<p>The adverbs and the adverbial phrases modify a verb, an adjective, or another adverb. As

<table id=tb102.1>
<row><cell lang=war>&ldquo;dánay&rdquo; acó cumádto <cell>(I go there sometimes)
<row><cell lang=war>nabasa n&gtilde;ani acó, nábasa &ldquo;man&rdquo; hiyá <cell>(If I read, he reads also).
</table>

<p>The adverbs are generally placed next to the word that they modify, some before the said word as &ldquo;agsob&rdquo; (frequently), &ldquo;dánay&rdquo; (sometimes), &ldquo;masócot&rdquo; (often), &ldquo;macatalagsa&rdquo; (seldom), etc., and other after the said word as &ldquo;pa&rdquo; (yet), &ldquo;na&rdquo; (already), &ldquo;man&rdquo; (also), &ldquo;gud&rdquo; (precisely), etc., and some before or after the said word as &ldquo;lugúd&rdquo; (on the contrary), etc.


<div1 id=ch3.6>
<head>REPRESENTATIVE RELATION</head>


<p>The important Bisayan word that expresses representative relations is the relative pronoun <hi lang=war>nga</hi>, which is invariable.

<table id=tb102.2>
<row><cell lang=war>an batá nga tinmauag ha acon <cell>(the boy who called me)
<row><cell lang=war>an cabatáan n&gtilde;a tinmawag ha acon <cell>(the boys who called me)
</table>

<p>As to cases, we have seen (page 52) that this relative <hi>nga</hi> never refers to the object of the verb. The sentences in the English and other languages, where the corresponding relative pronoun relates to the object of the verb and where consequently the said relative is in the objective case, are expressed in Bisayan in passive voice which is the most used in this tongue.<note n=1>The fact that there are three classes of passive voice in Bisayan show the great importance of the said voice in this tongue. Thus if we wish to say &ldquo;I love you&rdquo;, it is more expressive to say: <hi>hinihigugma co icao</hi> (<corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr>: <hi>you are loved by me</hi>) than to say: <hi>nahigugma aco ha imo.</hi></note> Thus, if we wish to say


    <p rend=example>the boy whom I called


<p rend=noindent>we <corr sic=thould resp=errata>should</corr> say


    <p rend=example lang=war>an bata n&gtilde;a tinauag co


<p rend=noindent>which <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr> is: the boy who was called by me.

<p>The personal, demonstrative and possessive pronouns agree in person and number with their antecedents or the word <pb id=pb103 n=103>or words that they represent. There is no agreement in gender because the pronouns have no gender.



<div1 id=ch3.7>
<head>CONNECTIVE RELATIONS</head>

<p>The prepositions join the nouns, their equivalents, or the pronouns to some other word. They place in the objective case the word that depends on <corr sic=then>them</corr>.

<p>The most important preposition in, Bisayan is <hi lang=war>ha</hi>, which is equivalent to nearly all of the prepositions of other languages. Examples:


<table id=tb103.1>
<row><cell>He saw me&mdash;<cell lang=war>hiyá quinmitá <hi>ha</hi> acon
<row><cell>He wrote to me&mdash;<cell lang=war>hiyá nagsurát <hi>ha</hi> acon
<row><cell>I come to Tacloban&mdash;<cell lang=war>nacanhi acó <hi>ha</hi> Tacloban
<row><cell>I come from Palo&mdash;<cell lang=war>ticang acó <hi>ha</hi> Palô
<row><cell>I pass by your house&mdash;<cell lang=war>linmabáy acó <hi>ha</hi> iyo baláy
<row><cell>He is in the room&mdash;<cell lang=war>aadto niyá <hi>ha</hi> solód
<row><cell cols=2>etc.
</table>


<div1 id=ch3.8>
<head>ABSOLUTE AND INDEPENDENT CONSTRUCTIONS</head>

<p>Absolute and independent constructions take place in Bisayan with vocatives, and interjections.

<p>Vocatives, as

<table>
<row><cell lang=war>Pedro, n&gtilde;a niya, cadí dao <cell>(Peter, he <corr sic=sad resp=errata>said</corr>, come, please)
</table>

<p>Interjection, as

<table>
<row><cell lang=war>Pastilan, caloóyi gad acó <cell>(oh!, have pity of me)
</table>

<p>Some independent phrases are connected with the rest of the thought by the adverb <hi>man</hi>, as

<table>
<row>
    <cell lang=war>naabot camí, natutunod man an adlao
    <cell>(when we arrived, the sun set; <corr sic=litterally resp=errata>literally</corr><corr sic=";">:</corr> we arrived, the sun also set).
</table>


<div1 id=ch3.9>
<head>SYNTAX OF VERBS</head>

<p>THE INFINITIVE. The present has the construction of the noun, as

<table id=tb103.2>
<row><cell lang=war>an pag-arám hin maopay ámo an catungdánan han batà <cell>(to learn well is the duty of a boy).
</table>

<p>The gerund expresses the idea of past when <corr sic=preceeded resp=errata>preceded</corr> by the particle <hi>han</hi>, contraction of the preposition <hi>ha</hi> and the article <hi>an</hi>, as

<pb id=pb104 n=104><table id=tb104.1>
<row><cell lang=war>han pagsírang han adlao, nagmamatá na acó <cell>(when the sun raised, I was already awake).
</table>

<p>The past participle has the construction of an adjective, as

<table id=tb104.2>
<row><cell lang=war>binilangò n&gtilde;a táuo <cell>(prisoner; <corr sic=litterally>literally</corr>: an imprisoned man)
</table>

<p>INDICATIVE. Besides its ordinary <corr sic=used resp=errata>use</corr>, its present is frequently employed with the particle <hi>cuntà</hi>, to express the idea of an interrupted or intended action. As

<table id=tb104.3>
<row><cell lang=war>cun uaráy ca cánhi, nalacát cunta acó <cell>(If you had not come, I would have gone)
</table>

<p>SUBJUNCTIVE. It being used in a subordinate propositions, it is always constructed with the conjunctions <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> (thato), <hi>cun, n&gtilde;anì</hi> (if), <hi>cuntà</hi> (if possible).

<p><hi>N&gtilde;a</hi> and <hi>cun</hi> always precede the verb; <hi>n&gtilde;anì</hi> and <hi>cunta</hi> when used for the subjunctive, is always placed after the verb. As


<table id=tb104.4>
<row><cell lang=war>caruyag co n&gtilde;a cumanhi ca buas <cell>(I wish you to come to-morrow; literally: I wish that you may come to-morrow).<note n=1><p>In Bisayan, there is no construction similiar to that of the English tongue, consisting in putting the subject in the objective case, and its verb in the infinitive: which is an exact Latin syntax, as

<table id=tb104.5>
<row><cell>he wishes      <cell>me       <cell>to come
<row><cell>Ille vult      <cell>me       <cell>venire
</table>

<p>Such sentence is expressed in Bisayan with the aid of the conjunction <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi>, the subject in nominative case, and the verb in subjunctive mood, thus

<p lang=war>caruyag niya <hi>n&gtilde;a</hi> acó camánhi.</note>
<row><cell lang=war>cun lumabay hi Juan, tanága.
<cell rows=2>(If <corr sic=Jonh resp=errata>John</corr> passes by, call him)
<row><cell lang=war>lumabáy n&gtilde;anì hi Juan taúaga.
<row><cell lang=war>lumabáy cuntà hi Juan <cell>(God grant that John passes).
</table>


<p>NOTE.&mdash;The subjunctive form is frequently constructed with the modal adverbs and adjectives and then such combinations have the construction of an adjective. As

<table id=tb104.6>
<row><cell lang=war>táuo n&gtilde;a maopay sumurat <cell>(a good writer: literally; a man who writes well)
<row><cell lang=war>macosóg sumáog n&gtilde;a carabao <cell>(a strong dragger carabao)
<row><cell cols=2>etc.
</table>




<pb id=pb105 n=105>
<div2 id=ch3.10>
<head>ARRANGEMENT OF WORDS</head>

<p>The adjectives and verbs are always preferably employed, whenever possible, at the beginning of a phrase, clause, or sentence.

<p>Examples:

<table id=tb105.1>
<row><cell lang=war>maópay n&gtilde;a táuo <cell>(good man)
<row><cell lang=war>nagsusurát acó <cell>(I write)
<row><cell cols=2>etc.
</table>




<div1 id=ch3.11>
<head>VIOLATIONS OF GOOD USE</head>

<div2 id=ch3.11.1>
<head><corr sic=BARBARISM>BARBARISMS</corr></head>

<p>The most frequent violation of good use of the Bisayan tongue is the <hi>Barbarism</hi>.

<p>It is committed by using foreign words, and foreign constructions.



<div2 id=ch3.11.2>
<head>FOREIGN WORDS</head>

<p>Many foreign words have been and are being introduced in the Bisayan conversations and writings. Must of such words are being adopted, not because they are necessary, but simply thru affectation and love of innovation, thus attempting against the purity of Bisayan. Some of the words introduced however are necessary as they have no corresponding<corr resp=errata> word</corr> in Bisayan.




<pb id=pb106 n=106>
<div3 id=ch3.11.3>
<head>FOREIGN WORDS UNNECESSARILY USED IN BISAYAN</head>

<div4 id=ch3.11.3.1>
<head>Spanish words</head>


<p><table id=tb106.1>
<row><cell>Abierto, abre (open)                         <cell>for                       <cell lang=war>Binucsan, inucáb, bucás ucáb.
<row><cell>Adorno (<corr sic=adonment resp=errata>adornment</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dayan, rayandayan
<row><cell>Agua (used to mean perfume)                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Talamhot
<row><cell>Aguanta (wait suffer)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Ílob, hulát
<row><cell>Alisto (from <hi>listo</hi>)                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Andam
<row><cell>Amigo (friend)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sángcay
<row><cell>Apique (close)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sóoc
<row><cell>Apura, apurado (hurry)                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dagmit, cadagmitan
<row><cell>Atrever, atrevido (bold)                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Paggahúm, gamhánan
<row><cell>Aver (for &ldquo;give me&rdquo;)                         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Icadí
<row><cell>Aver pa (God grant)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Mangad pa
<row><cell>Bajado, Bajar (low)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Habobó, obós
<row><cell>Bancó (bench)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pongcóan, lincoran, pápag
<row><cell>Bando (edict)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pahamatngon
<row><cell>Batido (for &ldquo;experienced&rdquo;)                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lasgud, hiara
<row><cell>Bote (for boat)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sacayan
<row><cell>Cada usá (each one)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tágsa
<row><cell>Calabozo (jail)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Bilangóan
<row><cell>Calculo (calculus)                           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Igoigo
<row><cell>Calle (street)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dalan
<row><cell>Campana (bell)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Linganay
<row><cell>Canta (sing)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Laygay, laylay
<row><cell>Cantodes (from &ldquo;cantores&rdquo;)                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Paralaygay
<row><cell>Carcel (jail)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Bi1angóan
<row><cell>Cargo (for &ldquo;debt&rdquo;)                           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Útang
<row><cell>Carne (flesh <corr sic=meet resp=errata>meat</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Unód
<row><cell>Capaz (able)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sadang, angay, tacús
<row><cell>Castigo (punishment)                         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Siroc
<row><cell>Cocina (kitchen)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lotoán
<row><cell>Coger                                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagdacóp pacasacób
<row><cell>Colá (from &ldquo;colar&rdquo;)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Bacá
<row><cell>Color (color)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tina, samay, culay
<pb id=pb107 n=107>
<row><cell>Comósta (from &ldquo;como está&rdquo; how are you)       <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <cell lang=war>Matiónan-o ca
<row><cell>Común (common)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Casahirác
<row><cell>Convida (invite)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Áabiabi, sabi
<row><cell>Contra (against)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tipa, patoe, caauay
<row><cell>Cortina (curtain)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Biráy
<row><cell>Cuarta (money)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Salapí
<row><cell>Cuarto (room)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Solód
<row><cell>Cuerdas (strings)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dolós
<row><cell>Cuello (collar)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Balióg
<row><cell>Cuenta (account)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Iháp, ísip
<row><cell>De balde (<corr sic=mousefully resp=errata>unusefully</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Cáuaug
<row><cell>De buenas (fortunate)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Paláran
<row><cell>Decir (for &ldquo;ask&rdquo;)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Siring hingyap
<row><cell><corr sic=Deefcto resp=errata>Defecto</corr> (defect) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Casaquihán, carát&apos;an
<row><cell>De malas (<corr sic=unfurtunate resp=errata>unfortunate</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Uaráy palad
<row><cell>Derecho (right)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tádong, dáyon, catadun&gtilde;an
<row><cell>Descanso (rest)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pahúuay
<row><cell>Despedida (farewell)                         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Panamilit
<row><cell>Dibujo (<corr sic=drowing resp=errata>drawing</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Badlis, Baguis
<row><cell>Diferencia (difference)                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Guincalainan, guicaíbban
<row><cell>Dilatar (for delay)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pag-uláng, pagpahalawig
<row><cell>Disgusto (unlikeness)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Cangalas
<row><cell>Dispensa (excuse)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pasaylo, paguará
<row><cell>Diversion (amusement)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Caliáuan, liáoliáo
<row><cell>Dulce (sweet candy)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Matam&apos;is
<row><cell>Empezar (to commence)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagticáng
<row><cell>Entra (for &ldquo;to make love&rdquo;)                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pangasáua
<row><cell>Entremés (joke)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tíao
<row><cell>Escuela (school)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Liborán
<row><cell>Espejo (glass)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Salamíng
<row><cell>Esquina (corner)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Casóngnan
<row><cell>Estampa (image)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Ladáuan
<row><cell>Fino (fine)                                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Gamay, pilí
<row><cell>Firme (for always)                           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Agsub, ónob
<row><cell>Fuerza (strength)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Cusóg
<row><cell>Fuerte (strong)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Macusóg, mabácod
<row><cell>Fusil (gun)                                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lutbang
<pb id=pb108 n=108><row><cell>Ganancia (gain)           <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <cell lang=war>Polós, tubo
<row><cell>Gracia (grace, favor)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Parábul
<row><cell>Gratis (used for &ldquo;payment&rdquo;)                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Himúdlay
<row><cell>Gusto (wish)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Caruyag
<row><cell>Hasta (until)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tubtub, ngadá
<row><cell>Hechura (shape)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Daguay
<row><cell>Interes (interest)                           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Guinsisiring, guinlalánat
<row><cell>Jardin (garden)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tanáman
<row><cell>La mesa (table)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dulang
<row><cell>Latigo (whip)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Latós
<row><cell>Lavá (from &ldquo;lavar&rdquo;, to wash)                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Búnac
<row><cell>Lavandero, a (launderer, laundress)          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Magburunác
<row><cell>Licencia, pag (to take leave)                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sárit, panamilit
<row><cell>Limós (from &ldquo;limosna&rdquo;, alms)                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Calóoy, hatag
<row><cell>Limpio (clean)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Mahínis
<row><cell>Lóa (praise)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dáyao
<row><cell>Lugar (for &ldquo;near&rdquo; or &ldquo;almost&rdquo;)               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dapit, ma
<row><cell>Macetas (flower-pot)                         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tinanóm, taranman
<row><cell>Maestro (teacher)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Magtorótdo
<row><cell>Manteca (<corr sic=bulter resp=errata>butter</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pinahagas
<row><cell>Mantel (tablecloth)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Basnig ha dulang
<row><cell>Mantilla (mantilla)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Taóng
<row><cell>Masiado (from &ldquo;demasiado&rdquo;, too)              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Uraura
<row><cell>Masque (from &ldquo;por más que&rdquo;, although)        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Bisan
<row><cell>Medio (half)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Catunga, bagá
<row><cell>Mismo (self-same)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Ngábao, gud
<row><cell>Muchacho (for servant)                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Surogóon
<row><cell>Número (number)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Iháp
<row><cell>O bien (or)                                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>O cun, ó, lugúd
<row><cell>Oración (prayer)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pangadye, paugamuyo
<row><cell>Orden (order)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sugo
<row><cell>Pabyon (from &ldquo;pabellón&rdquo;)                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Biráy
<row><cell>Paciencia (patience)                         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pag-ilub
<row><cell>Pago (for &ldquo;debt&rdquo;)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Utang
<pb id=pb109 n=109><row><cell>Palati (from &ldquo;palatico&rdquo;, from &ldquo;práctico&rdquo;) <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <cell lang=war>Mag-oróna
<row><cell>Paño (cloth)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Panapton, pudóng
<row><cell>Pañolito (handkerchief)                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Modongpódong
<row><cell>Para (for, halt)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Basi, ngada, hulat, ocóy, toróoc
<row><cell>Parecer (opinion)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sagbang
<row><cell>Parejo (equal)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sáma, sandag
<row><cell>Paseada (from &ldquo;paseo&rdquo;)                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lacatlácat
<row><cell>Peligro (danger)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Cataragman
<row><cell>Pensar (for talent)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Talíno
<row><cell>Perdona (from &ldquo;perdonar&rdquo;)                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pasaylo
<row><cell>Pero (but)                                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Cundi
<row><cell>Pertina (for &ldquo;pretina&rdquo;, waistband)           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Háuac
<row><cell>Pierde (from &ldquo;perder&rdquo; to <corr sic=lost resp=errata>lose</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lupig, nara
<row><cell>Pintar (to paint)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dum-it, díhog
<row><cell>Pintura (paint)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Idirihóg
<row><cell>Plato (plate)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pingan
<row><cell>Platito (a little dish)                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lampay
<row><cell>Pliegues (plaits)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lopi
<row><cell>Pobre (poor)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Cablas
<row><cell>Polvo (powder)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Bócboc
<row><cell>Posta (from &ldquo;apuesta&rdquo; <corr sic=bit resp=errata>bet</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Butáng
<row><cell>Precio (price)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pulít
<row><cell>Preparar (to prepare)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pag-andam, pagtíma
<row><cell>Preso (<corr sic=prissones>prisoner</corr>)  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Binilangá.
<row><cell>Probar (to <corr sic=laste resp=errata>taste</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tilao, sari
<row><cell>Propecto (from &ldquo;perfecto,&rdquo; perfect)          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Guinóod
<row><cell>Prueba (proof, evidence)                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Paacamatóod
<row><cell>Principal (chief, capital)                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Labáo, pohonan
<row><cell>Provecho   (profit)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Polós
<row><cell>Puerta   (door)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Ganghaán
<row><cell>Pulido   (neat)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Hag-id, mahamis
<row><cell>Puro   (pure)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Putli, lonlon, sandag, sáhid
<row><cell>Queja  (complaint)                           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sumbong
<row><cell>Querido    (dear)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Hinigugma, pinalanga
<row><cell>Que ver (for &ldquo;to do&rdquo;)                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Láhot
<pb id=pb110 n=110>
<row><cell>Quinolá (from colar)                         <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <cell lang=war>Bináchan
<row><cell>Rabenque (from &ldquo;rebenque&rdquo;, whipe)            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Latob, latos
<row><cell>Recibi (from &ldquo;recibir&rdquo;)                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Carauat
<row><cell>Reclamo (claim)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Paglánat
<row><cell>Redondo (round)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lipóron, malídong
<row><cell>Regalo (present)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Higugma, hatag, bucad
<row><cell>Regular (regular)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Igó, socol
<row><cell>Relo, relos (from &ldquo;reloj&rdquo; watch, clock)      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Orasán<note n=1 lang=en>See &ldquo;Foreign words <corr sic=necssarrily>necessarily</corr> adopted in Bisayan&rdquo;, <hi>infra</hi>.</note>
<row><cell>Remo (oar)                                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Gaód
<row><cell>Renuncio (from &ldquo;renunciar&rdquo;, to renounce)     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagdiri, pagdiuara
<row><cell>Reventa (from &ldquo;reventar&rdquo; to explode)         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagbotó
<row><cell>Rico (rich)                                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Mangáran
<row><cell>Rugal (from &ldquo;lugar&rdquo;, spot)                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Caraanan, tuna, umá
<row><cell>Saco (sack)                                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Sopót
<row><cell>Sadá (from &ldquo;cierra&rdquo;, close)                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Locób
<row><cell>Sala (hall)                                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Ruáng
<row><cell>Saya (skirt)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tampí, Talapí
<row><cell>Seguro (for &ldquo;probably&rdquo;)                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Mahámoe, angay la
<row><cell>Señor (Sir, Mister)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Guinoo
<row><cell>Sirve (from &ldquo;servir&rdquo; to serve)               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagmangno pag-ágad
<row><cell>Suerte (for &ldquo;talk&rdquo;)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Himangrao
<row><cell>Sustento (<corr sic=maintanence resp=errata>maintenance</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagbubi, iburuhi, cabuhian
<row><cell>Tabla (board)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Bugha
<row><cell>Tachar (for &ldquo;contempt&rdquo;)                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Yúbit, támay
<row><cell>Taza (cup)                                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Yahóng
<row><cell>Tiempo (time)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Adlao, túig
<row><cell>Tienda (merchandise, store)                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Baligya, baligyáan
<row><cell>Tieso (stiff)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Dángag, tadóng
<row><cell>Tocar (to play)                              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagtonóg
<row><cell>Tocador (for glass)                          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Salamíng
<row><cell>Tonto (fool)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lórong, palinqui, pádlas
<row><cell>Trabajo (work)                               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Buhat
<pb id=pb111 n=111>
<row><cell>Tranea (cross-bar)                           <cell><seg copyOf=for>for</seg> <cell lang=war>Síol, Balabág
<row><cell>Tumba (to tumble)                            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Púcan
<row><cell>Vacio (empty)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Lungág
<row><cell>Ventana (window)                             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Tambóan
<row><cell>Verde (green)                                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Saguindáhon
<row><cell>Vicio (vice)                                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Casaquihán
<row><cell>Virtud (for &ldquo;power&rdquo;)                         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Gahúm
<row><cell>Zurce (for &ldquo;zurcir&rdquo; to darn)                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg>  <cell lang=war>Pagtábing,
</table>

<p rend=noindent>And many others.


<div4 id=ch3.11.3.2>
<head>CHINESE<note n=A>We do not refer to those <corr sic=chinese>Chinese</corr> words imported to Philippines with <corr sic=chinese>Chinese</corr> <corr sic=object resp=errata>objects</corr>. Such words are to be kept necessarily in Bisayan, because their equivalent vernacular expressions, either are lost, or never existed.</note> WORDS</head>


<p><table id=tb111.1>
<row><cell>Bochang (for sow)        <cell>for <cell lang=war>Cablas
<row><cell>Buísit (unfortunate)     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Uaray pálad
<row><cell>Camsya (for &ldquo;thank&rdquo;)     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Salámat
<row><cell>Gonggong (foolish)       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell>Uaray salabótan
<row><cell>Lamloc (<corr sic="deer, for" resp=errata>dear,</corr> fat) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Matamboc
<row><cell>Laotuy (old)             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Lagás, gurang
<row><cell>Syâ (for eat)            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Cáon
<row><cell>Sinqui (new)             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Bag-o
<row><cell>Tampuâ (excess, present) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Táuad, labis
<row><cell>Uchang (rich)            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Mangáran
<row><cell>Uísit (fortunate)        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Paláran.
</table>

<p rend=noindent>and some others.


<div4 id=ch3.11.3.3>
<head>ENGLISH WORDS</head>

<p><table id=tb111.2>
<row><cell>Haló (halloo)        <cell>for                      <cell lang=war>Ohó
<row><cell>Miting (&ldquo;meeting&rdquo;)   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Catirócan
<row><cell>Háyc (&ldquo;hike&rdquo;)        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Paglacát, sódoy
<row><cell>Moning (for &ldquo;money&rdquo;) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Salapí
<row><cell>Sausau (<corr sic=chaw-chaw resp=errata>chow-chow</corr>) <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <cell lang=war>Pagcáon, caraonón
</table>

<p>And others<corr>.</corr>


<p>NOTE.&mdash;At present, among the students it is frequent to hear <corr>&ldquo;</corr>¿háin an ac <hi>dyografi</hi> (geography), an ac <hi>arismitic</hi> (arithmetic)?&rdquo; &ldquo;¿aada ca ha <hi>fif</hi> (fifth) <hi>greyd</hi> (grade)?&rdquo; &ldquo;maaram na acó <hi>mag espeling</hi> (spelling)&rdquo;&mdash;Why <corr sic="do not they">do they not</corr> talk in English?

<pb id=pb112 n=112><p>OBSERVATION. There are some Tagalog words and constructions used in Bisayan; but we do not consider their use as a barbarism, because Tagalog and Bisayan are both dialects of a common tongue, and because such use may help the formation of a possible Filipino language.



<div3 id=ch3.11.4>
<head>FOREIGN CONSTRUCTIONS</head>

<p>Among others, the following is a barbarism in the construction: &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>maoroopay iní <hi rend=asc>QUE</hi> hitón</foreign>&rdquo;, (this is better than that). The use of the <hi rend=asc lang=es>QUE</hi> (which is Spanish meaning &ldquo;than&rdquo;) is entirely Spanish and is not necessary in Bisayan, as the mentioned sentence is expressed simply and with the same strength and more purity and correctness: &ldquo;<foreign lang=war>maooropáy iní hitón</foreign>&rdquo;.



<div3 id=ch3.11.5>
<head>FOREIGN WORDS NECESSARILY ADOPTED IN BISAYAN</head>

<p>But there are many words now in use in Bisayan the adoption of which enriches rather then destroys the language. We refer to those words that have been necessarily imported from other languages to express ideas not represented by any word, or whose corresponding words are lost in Bisayan.

<p>We do not consider their use as a barbarism, as it is not considered us such in English, Spanish, French and other European languages the adoption of Greek and Latin words. We not only do not criticize <corr sic="súch">such</corr> adoption in the Filipino dialects but rather desire and encourage it, because it will undoubtedly enable our dialects to be used in all kinds of scientific and artistic expressions.

<p>Among the foreign words already adopted, the following may be counted:

<p><hi rend=sc>Dyos</hi> (from the Spanish <hi rend=sc>Dios</hi>). It is true that we have the Tagálog <hi rend=sc>Bathala</hi> which refers to the omnipotency, and the Bisayan <hi rend=sc>Laón</hi> which refers to the eternity. But in view of the fact that the word <hi rend=sc>Dyos</hi> derived from the Latin <hi lang=la>Deus</hi>, from the Greek <hi>Zeus</hi> which means <hi>Divinite, Supreme <corr sic=Begin>Being</corr></hi>, has been so much used in Bisayan, and it represent another phase of the attributes of God, we think that the said <pb id=pb113 n=113>word DYOS ought to be adopted in Bisayan, adapting its form to the inflections of our dialect.

<p><hi rend=sc>Oras</hi> (from the Spanish <hi rend=sc>hora</hi> &ldquo;hour&rdquo;).&mdash;We have to adopt this word, as there is no corresponding expression known in Bisayan. By its adoption we have a way to avoid the use of <hi rend=sc>reloj</hi>, with the derivative <hi rend=sc>orasan</hi> already used.

<p><hi rend=sc>Bapor</hi> (from the Spanish &ldquo;vapor&rdquo; <corr sic=steambot>steamboat</corr>). It has no corresponding in Bisayan. We have <hi rend=sc lang=war>sacayán</hi> (boat), but it does not include the idea of the &ldquo;steam.&rdquo;

<p><hi rend=sc>Papel</hi> (from the Spanish &ldquo;papel&rdquo;).&mdash;It has no corresponding in Bisayan.

<p>The Spanish names of the days of the week, and of the months of the year, which must be written in Bisayan form, as: <hi rend=sc>LUNES, MARTES, MYERKOLES, HWEBES, BYERNES, SABADO, DOMINGO, ENERO, PEBRERO, MARSO, ABRIL, MAYO, JUNYO, HULYO, AGOSTO, SEPTYEMBRE, OKTUBRE, NOBYEMBRE, DISYEMBRE.</hi>

<p><hi rend=sc>Arorú</hi> (from the English &ldquo;arrow-root&rdquo;). A plant. And many others.





<pb id=pb115 n=115>
</body>
<back id=backmatter>
<div1 id=appendix type=Appendix>
<head>APPENDIX</head>


<pb id=pb117 n=117>
<div2 id=app1>
<head>NOTES ON BISAYAN RHETORIC AND POETICS</head>


<div3 id=app1.1>
<head>FIGURES OF SPEECH</head>

<p><hi>Simile.</hi> This figure is one of the most used in Bisayan, even in ordinary conversations.

<p>Examples:

<lg lang=war>
    <l><ab type=lineNum>1.</ab> Bagá an násirong n&gtilde;a dila.
</lg>

<p>Applied to a person or thing intended to be kept out of the rain, but which becomes wet, like the tongue (dila) which is always wet in the mouth.

<lg lang=war>
    <l><ab type=lineNum>2.</ab> Canogon pa dao la&mdash;san imo catindog
    <l>maópay si báyhon&mdash;maráot an bántog
    <l>igpapananglit co&mdash;bayábas n&gtilde;a hinóg,
    <l>maópay an panit&mdash;olóron an onód
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song,)

<p>Where the resemblance is between &ldquo;maopay si bayhon&rdquo; and &ldquo;maopay an panit&rdquo;, and also between &ldquo;maráot an bantog&rdquo; and &ldquo;olóron an onód&rdquo;.

<p><hi>Metaphor.</hi> It is also used, especially in poetry.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l><ab type=lineNum>1.</ab> Cáhoy ca n&gtilde;a linauáan
    <l>sa búquid nanauantáuan
    <l>cun canan Dyos ca pagbut-an
    <l>matopóng sa ulasiman.
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)

<p>Applied to one who is in a high position in life, like &ldquo;cahoy n&gtilde;a linauáan&rdquo;, the &ldquo;lauáan&rdquo; tree being one of the tallest trees.

<p><hi>Allegory.</hi> It is also found in Bisayan.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Ugá n&gtilde;a cáhoy si láuas,
    <l>patáy na, layâ si dáhon
    <pb id=pb118 n=118><l>nanaringsing sin casáquit
    <l>namún&gtilde;a sin camatáyon
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)

<p>Here the life or body (láuas) is called a dry tree (ugá n&gtilde;a cáhoy), already dead (patáy na), whose leaves are withered (laya si dahon), and which sprouted sorrow (nanaringsing sin casáquit), and gave as fruit, the death (namún&gtilde;a sin camatáyon).

<p><hi>Personification</hi>. One of the most frequent cases of personification in Bisayan is that consisting in applying to things and objects the personal article <hi>si</hi>.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Nagtitinan&gtilde;is <hi>si</hi> tucmo
    <l>cay tiarábut an bagyo.
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)


<p>Where the turtle-dove, (tucmo) is personifed by <hi>si</hi>. The expression would lose much of its charm if the article <hi>an</hi> is employed instead of <hi>si</hi>.

<p><hi>Antithesis</hi>. We have this figure in Bisayan.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Canógon pa dao la&mdash;san imo catindog
    <l>maópay si bayhon&mdash;maráot an bantog, etc.
</lg>


<p>Where &ldquo;maopay&rdquo; (good) and &ldquo;maraot&rdquo; (bad), &ldquo;bayhon&rdquo; (face) and &ldquo;bántog&rdquo; (fame) are contrasted.

<p><hi>Epigram</hi>. This figure, in its modern meaning, is used in Bisayan.

<p>Example:


<lg lang=war>
    <l>Gumhúlat pa an naghínay.
    <l>an nagdagmit, uaráy.
</lg>


<p>Which literally means: he who went slow was awaited for; he who hastened was not waited for. Its point is equivalent to that of the English &ldquo;slow, but sure.&rdquo; &ldquo;Guinhulat&rdquo; (was awaited for) &ldquo;uaráy&rdquo; (was not), &ldquo;naghínay&rdquo; (went slow) and &ldquo;nagdágmit&rdquo; (<corr sic=hastned resp=errata>hastened</corr>) are contrasted.


<pb id=pb119 n=119><p><hi>Metonymy</hi>. It is also found in Bisayan.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>An patay palan&gtilde;it, an buhi pacauít.
</lg>

<p>Literally: let the dead go to heaven; let the living go to the &ldquo;cauít&rdquo; (a bamboo where the tubâ wine is ordinarily placed). The figure consists in this word &ldquo;cauít,&rdquo; container, for &ldquo;tuba wine,&rdquo; the thing contained.

<p><hi>Synecdoche</hi>.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Pag árog hin damò nga bugás cay damo camí n&gtilde;a babà.
</lg>

<p>Literally it means: &ldquo;Prepare much rice because we are many mouths.&rdquo; Here the <hi>mouths</hi> (baba) a part, is used for <hi>person</hi>, the whole.

<p><hi>Apostrophe</hi>. We have it also in Bisayan.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Ohoy m&gtilde;a lan&gtilde;it&mdash;mga cahatas&apos;an.
    <l>taban&gtilde;i, buligui&mdash;adin may pinas&apos;an
    <l>an iní nga pálad&mdash;con diri mabáui
    <l>nouontan dao adá&mdash;sinin quinabuhi
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)


<p>Literally: Heavens, altitudes, protect, help this who suffers something; if this fate is not averted, it will undoubtedly affect the life.

<p><hi>Exclamation.</hi>

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>¡Pastilán bidíday,&mdash;bididay ca man la
    <l>n&gtilde;a nacacalucmay&mdash;sinin hunahuna! ...
    <l>¡ayáo pag saquita!&mdash;¡ayáo pagbidóa,
    <l>cay mag titinangis&mdash;canugon san luha! ...
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)



<p><hi>Interrogation.</hi>

<p>Example:


<lg lang=war><lg>
    <l>M&gtilde;a langit, m&gtilde;a langit;
    <l>¿háin dao dapit an sáquit? ...
    </lg>

    <pb id=pb120 n=120><lg>
    <l>sa calibutan uaráy man:
    <l>sabali sa panomdoman.
</lg></lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)



<p><hi><corr sic=Hyberbole>Hyperbole</corr></hi>. It is frequent in Bisayan.

<p>Examples:

<list>
    <item><ab type=itemNum>1.</ab> Macapánas hin buquid. (Man able to level a mountain)
    <item><ab type=itemNum>2.</ab> Macasagpo bin bahá. (Man able to suspend a flood)
</list>

<lg lang=war>
    <l><ab type=lineNum>2.</ab> Cun totóo, intoy&mdash;n&gtilde;a imo tinguha
    <l>pag biling la anay&mdash;sílot n&gtilde;a may bóa.
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)


<p>Literally: If your love is true, look for a &ldquo;silot&rdquo; (a young fruit of cocoanut) which has &ldquo;bua&rdquo; (the bulb of the old cocoanut fruit when it is old enough to be used as a seed).

<p><hi>Climax</hi>

<p>Example:


<lg lang=war>
    <l>¡ ............
    <l>nanaringsing sin masáquit,
    <l>namúnga sin camatáyon.
</lg>


<p><hi>Irony</hi>.

<p>Example:

<p>¡Camaopay mo! uaray ca gud pag tuman han imo pólon&gtilde;.

<p>Literally: How good are you! you did not keep your word.


<p><hi>Asyndeton</hi>.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Ohoy m&gtilde;a lan&gtilde;it&mdash;m&gtilde;a cahatas&apos;an
    <l><hi>taban&gtilde;i, buligui,</hi> inín may pinas&apos;an, etc.
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)


<p><hi>Repetition</hi>.

<pb id=pb121 n=121><p>Examples:


<lg lang=war>
<l><ab type=lineNum>1.</ab> <hi>Dirì co cay</hi> yubit&mdash;<hi>diri co cay</hi> dáyao
<l>pamahonpáhon mo&mdash;baga may parayao; etc.
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)

<lg lang=war>
<l><ab type=lineNum>2.</ab> Pastilán, <hi>bididay</hi>&mdash;<hi>bididay</hi> ca man la
<l>n&gtilde;a nacacalúcmay&mdash;sinín hunahuña, etc.
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A popular song)


<p><hi>Concatenation</hi>.

<p>Example:

<lg lang=war>
<l>Pastilán <hi>ca curi&mdash;cacuri capinan</hi>
<l><hi>capin ca mabide</hi>&mdash;san <hi>bido</hi> sa <hi>dughan</hi>,
<l><hi>dughan</hi> co <hi>pagílob&mdash;ilob calauasan</hi>,
<l><hi>láuas</hi> co <hi>naponò&mdash;pono</hi> casaquitan.
</lg>

    <p rend=right>(A polular song).




<div2 id=app1.2>
<head>PROSE</head>

<p>Of the three universal important forms in prose, <hi>i.e.</hi>, description, narration, and exposition nothing in general needs be observed.


<div3 id=app1.2.1>
<head>LETTERS</head>

<p>At present, one of the forms most generally employed in Bisayan prose is that belonging to the class of narration, the letter.

<p>Nothing special needs be observed about letters, at present times, apart from their external forms and the tendency to innovation prominently shown in them, more than anywhere else, by frequent barbarisms.

<p>As to the external forms of the Bisayan letters, it is to be observed that a routinary introduction is almost universally followed. We refer to the ordinary introduction consisting in the following ideas and order: &ldquo;This letter has <pb id=pb122 n=122>no other purpose&rdquo; 2&rpar; &ldquo;but to ask how you are&rdquo; 3&rpar; &ldquo;because as to me&rdquo; 4&rpar; &ldquo;I am in a good health&rdquo;.

<p>And after such an invariable introduction, the writer goes on in a paragraph apart; &ldquo;And I shall add that&rdquo;, etc.

<p>Example:


    <q rend=block lang=war><p>Uaráy láin n&gtilde;a tuyó hiní n&gtilde;a acon surat cúndi an damo n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a pan&gtilde;omósta co ha imo, cay cun acó in ipaquiána, calooy sa Dyos maópay.

    <p>N&gtilde;an isonouod co liuát, etc.</q>


<p>This is the introduction generally adopted. We do not hesitate to state that more than fifty per cent of the letters written in our Bisayan commence with these or equivalent ideas and in the <corr sic="some other" resp=errata>same order</corr>.

<p>As to the barbarisms, they are employed thruout the entire letter.

<p>On the heading it is usually written:


    <q rend=block><p lang=es>Tacloban, á 2 de Octubre de 1908.</q>


<p rend=noindent>instead of:


    <q rend=block><p>Tacloban, ica 2 han Octubre han 1908.</q>


<p>On the introduction it ordinarily appears


    <q rend=block><p lang=es>Sr. D ........................................</q>

<p rend=noindent>or

    <q rend=block><p lang=es>Sra. D.<hi rend=sup>a</hi> ........................................</q>

    <q rend=block><p lang=es>Mi estimado amigo:</q>

<p rend=noindent>or

    <q rend=block><p lang=es>Muy estimada Señora:</q>


<p>The body of the letter is usually as follows:

    <q rend=block lang=war><p>Uaray lain n&gtilde;a <hi>objeto</hi> hini n&gtilde;a acon surat, <hi>sino</hi> an damo n&gtilde;a m&gtilde;a <hi>pangomosta</hi> ha iyo ngatanán, cay cun camí in iyo ipaquiána, calooy sa Dyos, uaray ano man n&gtilde;a <hi>novedad</hi>.

    <pb id=pb123 n=123><p><hi>Y de consiguiente</hi>, tatay, isusunod co liuat; cun uaray mo <hi>inconveniente, gusto</hi> co cunta comadá pag <hi>vacacion; pero como guinadvertir</hi> mo man aco han nacadi ca n&gtilde;a mag <hi>procurar</hi> acó hin pag <hi>obtener</hi> anay han <hi>titulo, por eso</hi> amo iní n&gtilde;a dirí aco na <hi>atrever</hi> pag guican <hi>mientras</hi> dirí paca aco macacarauát han imo <hi>contestation</hi> n&gtilde;a pag hatag hin <hi>permiso</hi>, bisan cun <hi>sobra y basta</hi> gud an acon m&gtilde;a <hi>deseos</hi> pag <hi>visita</hi> ha iyo. etc.</q>




<div2 id=app1.3>
<head>POETIC FORMS</head>

<p>Of the three main classes of poetry, epic, lyric and dramatic, the lyric is the only one preserved in Bisayan in the form of popular songs. The dramatic form is found at present mainly in the translations of Tagalog and Spanish dramas, usually employed as plays on the Patron&apos;s days in the towns.


<div3 id=app1.3.1>
<head>VERSIFICATION</head>

<p><hi>Rhythm</hi> and <hi>rhyme</hi> are observed in Bisayan poems.

<p>The rhyme is not so perfect as that of the Spanish verses. Consonant words or with similar sounding endings are employed in Bisayan.

<p><hi>Kinds of meter</hi>. There are two kinds of meter most used <hi>in</hi> Bisayan poetry: verses of six <corr sic=verses resp=errata>syllables, verses</corr> of eight syllables, and verses of twelve syllables divided in two fragments of six syllables each.

<p>Examples:

<p>Verses of six syllables:

<lg lang=war><lg>
    <l>¿Háin ca na, punay?...
    <l>cadí na panambo,
    <l>tambo madalíay,
    <l>liaua si casbo;
    <l>basi humalayhay
    </lg>

    <pb id=pb124 n=124><lg>
    <l>inín saquit, bido
    <l>nga asay tiónay
    <l>san casingcasing co.
</lg></lg>

<p>Verses of eight sy11ab1es:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Acó iní sugadsugad
    <l>san bánua nga tarotánglad,
    <l>bisan cun diín italad
    <l>mabubuhi cun may palad,
</lg>

<p>Verses of twelve syllables:

<lg lang=war>
    <l>Togon co sa imo,&mdash;mahal nga inógay
    <l>di ca gud padará&mdash;san damo nga sangcay;
    <l>an paglacát nime&mdash;gabay magmahinay,
    <l>nga diri hatócso,&mdash;lumiscad san látay.
</lg>


<p>Note.&mdash;The verses of twelve syllables are really verses of six, the odd verses not being rhymed.

<p><hi>Combinations</hi>. As seen in the preceding examples the combinations are the following:

<p>The verses of six syllables are grouped in four verses, the even verses being rhymed.

<p>The verses of eight syllables are grouped also in four verses all rhymed.

<p>The verses of twelve syllables are also grouped in four rhymed verses.




<div2 id=app1.4>
<head>COLLECTION OF SOME BISAYAN <corr sic=SONG resp=errata>SONGS</corr></head>


<p>NOTE&mdash;In transcribing the following <corr sic=song resp=errata>songs</corr>, we shall use, the orthography proposed in the note of the first page of this book using only three vowels: <hi>a, i, o</hi>.


<div3 id=app1.4.1>
<head>MORAL POETRY</head>

<lg lang=war><lg>
    <l>Si nanay, si tatay di ko babayuán
    <l>kay damò n&gtilde;a dogô an akon naota&gtilde;
    <l>kun pag-ilsipon an siyam ka botan.
    <l>&gtilde;a pag-inókoy ko sa kan nanay riyán.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Togon ko sa imo, mahal &gtilde;a inógay:
    <l>di ka god padará san damò &gtilde;a sangkay;
    <l>an paglakat nímo gabáy mag mahinay,
    <l>&gtilde;a dirí katokao, lomiskad san látay.
    </lg>

    <pb id=pb125 n=125><lg>
    <l>Kamakaroroyag sa matá pagkit&apos;on
    <l>sinin mag-asawa &gtilde;a waray sin limbog,
    <l>kon daw naabot na ira kamatayon
    <l>náboká an lan&gtilde;it bási nira sadlon.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Ayaw gani kahihilig
    <l>ayaw karirikandikan,
    <l>kay di man bagyo an toig,
    <l>di man kikilá an bolan.
</lg></lg>



<div3 id=app1.4.2>
<head>PHILOSOPHIC POETRY</head>

<lg lang=war><lg>
    <l>M&gtilde;a bitoón sa la&gtilde;it
    <l>may mapawà, may ma&gtilde;it&gtilde;it,
    <l>con sa tawo igpana&gtilde;lit,
    <l>may malípay, may masákit.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kahoy ka &gtilde;a linawaán
    <l>sa bokid nanawantawan,
    <l>kon kanan Dyos ka pagbot&apos;an
    <l>matopó&gtilde; sa olasiman.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Di ko ginkakasorok&apos;an
    <l>an salapí, an bolawan;
    <l>say ko ginkikinaha&gtilde;lan
    <l>maopay &gtilde;a ginawian.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Sogad gud akó san gamót
    <l>&gtilde;a nailarom sa kotkot,
    <l>kon kanan Dyos pagboót
    <l>malábaw akó san ódlot
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Diri ba ako pagsiri&gtilde;.
    <l>indayon, paghan&gtilde;nari&gtilde;,
    <l>kay ba&gtilde;in kitá kapad&gtilde;an,
    <l>harayó an borogkátan.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Guin holát pá an naghinay;
    <l>an nag dagmit, waráy.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Waráy hiní balos báyad
    <l>bas&apos;la an boót longáyad
</lg></lg>



<div3 id=app1.4.3>
<head>LOVE POETRY</head>

<lg lang=war><lg>
    <l>An bató bantilis náibas, nákilot
    <l>sa toró san tóbig sa darodagínot:
    <l>¡kasi&gtilde;kasi&gtilde; pa ba an diri homómok.
    <l>sa gógma san tawo kon sa tarinónot.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Di ba sadto ánay imo akó si&gtilde;si&gtilde;
    <l>sa walá &gtilde;a kamót, todló tamoyi&gtilde;ki&gtilde;;
    <l>baman itó niyán di ka na násiplat,
    <l>¿anó an solá ko sa imo nabóhat?
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>An sakít sa domdom og sa honahona,
    <l>makori ili&gtilde;kod, makori íhigda:
    <l>¿ihagád sa lán&gtilde;it? ¿itamod sa tona?...
    <l>¡A baá Dyos ko, máonan&apos;o dao la!...
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Pastilán kakori, ka kori kapinan
    <l>kapin kamabido san bido sa dóghan;
    <l>doghan ko pag-ilob, ilob kasawásan,
    <l>láwas ko &gtilde;a ponó pone kasakitan<corr>.</corr>
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Pastilán, bididay, bididay ka man la
    <l>ga nakakalokmay sinín honahona:
    <l>ayáo pag sakita, ayao pag bidóa,
    <l>kay mag titinangis kanógon san loha.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Pastilán ka kori, ka kor i&gtilde;akapin
    <l>san may pag kasákit sinin kasi&gtilde;kasi&gtilde;:
    <l>igpapana&gtilde;lit ko sa osá ga bori&gtilde;
    <l>bisan parigóson may gihapon bilin.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Háin ka na ponay,
    <l>kadi na panambo,
    <l>tambo madaliay.
    <l>liawá si kas&apos;bo.
    <l>basi homanáyhay
    <l>inin sakit bido
    <l>&gtilde;a asáy tiónay
    <l>sa kasigkasig ko.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Abá Ti&gtilde;ti&gtilde; abá Ti&gtilde;ti&gtilde;.
    <l>ioli an akon si&gtilde;si&gtilde;.
    <l>opayda kon logari&gtilde;on,
    <l>kondi kanan taklobauon.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Akon iglilibagliba&gtilde;
    <l>inin kasákit sa doghan
    <l>baman ha banig ig mata&gtilde;
    <l>sakit ga magtitilóga&gtilde;.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kadto na, kadto na, kadto na soranga
    <l>kadto na pag bili&gtilde; sin ibá &gtilde;a gogma
    <l>ayaw gad pag hi&gtilde;yap sin sogad sa akon
    <l>asáy ti&gtilde;ohán maópay ga láyhon
    </lg>

    <pb id=pb126 n=126><lg>
    <l>Kon boot ka man&gtilde;asáwa
    <l>inín barás pag pisia,
    <l>di ka &gtilde;ani makapisi
    <l>pag toraw na la ganoli.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kon daw ha kasiri&gtilde;anon
    <l>tobig ka &gtilde;a irinómon
    <l>diri sa dáhon pahonbon,
    <l>pahónbon sa doghan nakon
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kon bagá kahoy si lawas
    <l>patay na, laya si dahon
    <l>nanari&gtilde;si&gtilde; sin kasákit
    <l>namó&gtilde;a sin kamatáyon
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kap&apos;atán ka tuig an akon paghi&gtilde;yap
    <l>pag-imasisiri&gtilde; sa imo, binórak.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Han nákadto ka ha pantaw
    <l>akon ka gintitinan-aw
    <l>harápit ako matónaw
    <l>sa dako &gtilde;a pag kahidlaw
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Anó iní &gtilde;a nádoróy
    <l>kamasakit, kamakapoy,
    <l>an lawas sogád sin káhoy
    <l>&gtilde;aginhaharoharópoy
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Bohi pa an bató &gtilde;a pinamonakan
    <l>didto la katika&gtilde; an karokayakan
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Pastilán ka kori san pag-i&gtilde;irikan
    <l>nata&gtilde;is si inday &gtilde;a binabayáan,
    <l>gabáy daw la habsan inín kalalawdan
    <l>&gtilde;a diri tomólin inín pagsarakyan
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Han nakadto ka ha lawdon
    <l>akon ka gintinan-awon
    <l>hapit kó ikaw karawton
    <l>ha barás diri patonbon.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kon nag-iimót ka san imo kamathom
    <l>san pag kamabaysay san imo pamayhon,
    <l>bisan la an todló, an bohók, panapton
    <l>kon asay somira&gtilde;, maopay na nakon,
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Hiará ako magnawá
    <l>magsakaysakay sa bará
    <l>og didto ako hidagsa
    <l>sa kam &gtilde;awan &gtilde;a tuna
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Katlóan ka tuig &gtilde;a akon kahidlaw
    <l>sogád ka sin tobig nakon ikaóhaw
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kon baga ako si taro
    <l>tonáw na sa pag kaálo;
    <l>maopay si alima&gtilde;o
    <l>kay may pag kalonolóno
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Mga lagit, mga lagit,
    <l>¿háin daw dapít an sakit?....
    <l>sa kalibótan waráy man
    <l>sabáli sa panomdoman
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Sin pag kamami&gtilde;aw sinín kakorolpon
    <l>waráy god nabantad bis osá &gtilde;a dahon
    <l>bis an m&gtilde;a tamsi sáhid mabidó an
    <l>¿say pa ba an tawo, di aipan gihapon?....
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Hinógay na intoy, siton pakalipo&gtilde;
    <l>sin kinarokanhi sinin amon libo&gtilde;
    <l>opayda kon hiro iton imo bayhon
    <l>maamo&gtilde; ka daw la sinín bantog namon
</lg></lg>




<div3 id=app1.4.4>
<head>SUNDRY</head>

<lg lang=war><lg>
    <l>Adto na si adlaw
    <l>linmoyó sa bokid,
    <l>oli na, indayon,
    <l>kay waray pa tóbig.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Hi nonay &gtilde;a kawayánon
    <l>malobaylobay ha&gtilde;anon
    <l>naglilinakat ha kógon
    <l>hi hawak royokdoyókon.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Itón imo baba
    <l>&gtilde;a nagyayabora
    <l>&gtilde;a nagyiyinákan
    <l>sitón lonlun bowa;
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>kon di ko kahadlok
    <l>pághirót sin gaba
    <l>pag-oonloton ko
    <l>itón imo dila
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Akó magtotóon diri ko sasabwan
    <l>mangad na maloto, diri ko soso&gtilde;-an
    <l>si akó mátimo di ko poporoton
    <l>mangad na mabosóg, diri ko totolnon.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Anó man in akon kon diin ka kadto,
    <l>di mo la pag dad-on an tubig, kalayo:
    <l>di mo mam binohi ini &gtilde;a lawas ko
    <l>tinmobo si inday kosóg san amáy ko.
    </lg>

    <pb id=pb127 n=127><lg>
    <l>An tansman nimo mandi&gtilde;
    <l>ginsisinólod san kand &gtilde;
    <l>an taranman nakikil &gtilde;
    <l>kay gin bobowad san baktin.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>¿Ano ba, Dyos ko, an nakakasógad,
    <l>an isda sa dagat &gtilde;a nagkakalópad?...
    <l>¿ano ba, Dyos ko, iní ga nadoróy,
    <l>inin katamsihan &gtilde;a nagkakala&gtilde;oy?...
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Kanogon pa daw la san imo katindog
    <l>maópay si bayhon, maráot an bantog:
    <l>igpapana&gtilde;lit ko, bayabas &gtilde;a hinóg,
    <l>maópay an pánit, oloron an onód.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Ambot daw ada maorán
    <l>si dampog na&gtilde;o odtóhan
    <l>bisan la inin pa&gtilde;ánod
    <l>doróyog tipailáwod
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Busa, bayái, balitaw,
    <l>ayáw gad tood kay tíaw
    <l>iní &gtilde;a akon pagbolaw
    <l>igpapahaoli &gtilde;ahaw.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Hila&gtilde;kag kitá, hila&gtilde;kag
    <l>sinín palawán &gtilde;a pankag
    <l>kay ba&gtilde;in, idáy, makárag
    <l>dó loktan sinín alámag.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Makadí kamí maoli,
    <l>maoli &gtilde;a bagá diri,
    <l>naghihiawil pa &gtilde;ani
    <l>san ka maopay sangawi
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>An di ko iginpinólo&gtilde;
    <l>an kabasólan in akon:
    <l>si kahoy di mag torópo&gtilde;
    <l>may balíko, may matado&gtilde;
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Anó man in akon kon diín ka hanoy
    <l>di mo la pagdad-on an tobig, an kahoy
    <l>iní &gtilde;a lawas ko &gtilde;a makalolóoy
    <l>tinmobo kan tatay, kan nanay &gtilde;a iróy
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Diri ko kay yóbit, diri ko kay dayaw
    <l>pamahonpáhon mo bagá may paráyaw;
    <l>an imo pamálod pagkasada&gtilde;ana,
    <l>baga nagkokori an akon ginhawa.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Ayáw gad hin tamay, ayáw gad hin yóbit
    <l>kay magsáma man la inín aton pánit;
    <l>an aton logári&gtilde; ginkakalainan,
    <l>kay diri mag-osá inín aton &gtilde;aran.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Busa, bayái, bayái,
    <l>bayái ayáw baliki,
    <l>bisan dahon sin kamoti
    <l>mabobohi kami dinhi.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Abá Lolay, abá Lolay
    <l>ligid ligid sinin baybay
    <l>kon igkita ka sin away
    <l>dalagan, ayaw papátay
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Makadí kami maoli
    <l>sa baláy &gtilde;a sinorambi
    <l>bisan la mawaráy bó&gtilde;bo&gtilde;
    <l>maoli kay logari&gtilde;on
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>An di ko iginkinanta<note id=kantar n=A lang=en>Derived from the Spanish &ldquo;<foreign lang=es>cantar</foreign>&rdquo; (to sing)</note>
    <l>an kabasolán onína;
    <l>si kahoy di magsaráma
    <l>may baliko, may balísa
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>An akon pagkinantáhon<note n=A sameAs=kantar></note>
    <l>báyad san akon kináon;
    <l>bisan la akó to&gtilde;boyón
    <l>&gtilde;a diri oraoráhon.
    </lg>

    <lg>
    <l>Nag sisirom na daw inín kakorolpon
    <l>&gtilde;atanán &gtilde;a tamsi sa káhoy na hapon
    <l>kitá man an tawo ga may isip domdom.
    <l>máoli sa balay &gtilde;a kalogari&gtilde;on
</lg></lg>




<pb id=pb128 n=128>
<div1 id=app2>
<head>NOTES ON FILIPINO DIALECTOLOGY</head>


<p>It is beyond any question that most of the Filipino dialects are derived from a common origin: the Malay tongue.

<p>For this reason many Bisayan words are exactly the same in other Filipino dialects, and many others bear some local dialectal differences, thus always showing a common origin.

<p>The following lists are short collections of such words.



<div2 id=app2.1>
<head>WORDS EXACTLY THE SAME IN BISAYAN AND IN TAGALOG</head>


<div3>
<head>A</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Ako.</foreign><note n=A>A: We use in these lists the orthography proposed in the first page of this book, as an orthography practically the same is now being much used in Tagalog. But we employ only <corr sic="there vowells" resp=errata>three vowels</corr>: <hi>a</hi>, <hi>i</hi>, <hi>o</hi>.</note>&mdash;I
<item><foreign lang=war>Agaw.</foreign>&mdash;To <corr sic=snatsch>snatch</corr>
<item><foreign lang=war><corr sic=Aglit resp=errata>A&gtilde;lit</corr>.</foreign>&mdash;A little pot
<item><foreign lang=war>Amihan.</foreign>&mdash;North wind
<item><foreign lang=war>Anák.</foreign>&mdash;son, daughter
<item><foreign lang=war>Anino.</foreign>&mdash;Shadow
<item><foreign lang=war>Apo.</foreign>&mdash;Grandson, grand-daughter
<item><foreign lang=war>Apog.</foreign>&mdash;Lime
<item><foreign lang=war>Asawa.</foreign>&mdash;Wife
<item><foreign lang=war>Asín.</foreign>&mdash;Salt
<item><foreign lang=war><corr sic="Aswág" resp=errata>aswa&gtilde;</corr>.</foreign>&mdash;Witch
<item><foreign lang=war>Atáy.</foreign>&mdash;Liver
<item><foreign lang=war>Away.</foreign>&mdash;Fight
</list>

<div3>
<head>B</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Baboy.</foreign>&mdash;Pig
<item><foreign lang=war>Baga.</foreign>&mdash;Red-hot
<item><foreign lang=war><corr sic=Baga resp=errata>Bagá</corr>.</foreign>&mdash;as, like
<item><foreign lang=war><corr sic="Bagá" resp=errata>Baga</corr>.</foreign>&mdash;Lung
<item><foreign lang=war>Bagon.</foreign>&mdash;To raise
<item><foreign lang=war>Bantay.</foreign>&mdash;Watch
<item><foreign lang=war>Bantilis.</foreign>&mdash;A kind of rock
<item><foreign lang=war>Basa.</foreign>&mdash;To read
<item><foreign lang=war>Bata.</foreign>&mdash;Child
<item><foreign lang=war>Bató.</foreign>&mdash;Stone
<item><foreign lang=war>Bawi.</foreign>&mdash;To recover
<item><foreign lang=war>Bayabas.</foreign>&mdash;Guava
<item><foreign lang=war>Bayad.</foreign>&mdash;Pay
<item><foreign lang=war>Bayáw.</foreign>&mdash;Brother-in-law
<item><foreign lang=war>Boká.</foreign>&mdash;Open, untied
<item><foreign lang=war>Bokás.</foreign>&mdash;Open
<item><foreign lang=war>Bokó.</foreign>&mdash;Knot
<item><foreign lang=war>Bohók.</foreign>&mdash;Hair
<item><foreign lang=war>Bo&gtilde;a.</foreign>&mdash;Fruit
</list>


<div3>
<head>K</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Kabig.</foreign>&mdash;Pull
<item><foreign lang=war>Kahoy.</foreign>&mdash;Tree, timber, wood
<item><foreign lang=war>Kawayan.</foreign>&mdash;Bamboo
<item><foreign lang=war>Kilala.</foreign>&mdash;To know
<item><foreign lang=war>Koha.</foreign>&mdash;Take
<item><foreign lang=war>Kóla&gtilde;.</foreign>&mdash;Insufficient
<item><foreign lang=war>Kota.</foreign>&mdash;Wall
</list>


<div3>
<head>D</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Dagat.</foreign>&mdash;Sea
<item><foreign lang=war>Dahon.</foreign>&mdash;Leave
<item><foreign lang=war>Dalí.</foreign>&mdash;Quick
<item><foreign lang=war>Dila.</foreign>&mdash;Tongue
<item><foreign lang=war>Dogó.</foreign>&mdash;Blood
</list>


<div3>
<head>I</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Ibabaw.</foreign>&mdash;Over
<item><foreign lang=war>Ikaw.</foreign>&mdash;Thou, you
<item><foreign lang=war>Init.</foreign>&mdash;Heat
<item><foreign lang=war>Inóm.</foreign>&mdash;Drink
</list>

<pb id=pb129 n=129><div3>
<head>H</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Habagat.</foreign>&mdash;West
<item><foreign lang=war>Hagdan.</foreign>&mdash;Staircase
<item><foreign lang=war>Hayop.</foreign>&mdash; Animal
<item><foreign lang=war>Hiláw.</foreign>&mdash;Unripe
<item><foreign lang=war>Hínay.</foreign>&mdash;Slow
<item><foreign lang=war>Hinog.</foreign>&mdash;Ripe
<item><foreign lang=war>Hógas.</foreign>&mdash;Wash
</list>


<div3>
<head>L</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Labis.</foreign>&mdash;Excess
<item><foreign lang=war>Lakbay.</foreign>&mdash;Go over
<item><foreign lang=war>La&gtilde;aw.</foreign>&mdash;Fly
<item><foreign lang=war>La&gtilde;it.</foreign>&mdash;Heaven, sky
<item><foreign lang=war>Lalaki.</foreign>&mdash;Male
<item><foreign lang=war>Laway.</foreign>&mdash;Saliva
<item><foreign lang=war>Likod.</foreign>&mdash;Back
<item><foreign lang=war>Limá.</foreign>&mdash;Five
<item><foreign lang=war>Liwanag.</foreign>&mdash;Clearness
<item><foreign lang=war>Lokso.</foreign>&mdash;Jump
<item><foreign lang=war>Lohá.</foreign>&mdash;Tear
<item><foreign lang=war>Lorâ.</foreign>&mdash;Spit
<item><foreign lang=war>Lotò.</foreign>&mdash;Cooked
</list>

<div3>
<head>M</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Manók.</foreign>&mdash;Chicken
<item><foreign lang=war>Matá.</foreign>&mdash;Eye
<item><foreign lang=war>Matambók.</foreign>&mdash;Fat
<item><foreign lang=war>May.</foreign>&mdash;There is, etc.
<item><foreign lang=war>Maya.</foreign>&mdash;A kind of bird
</list>

<div3>
<head>N</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Nipá.</foreign>&mdash;Nipá
<item><foreign lang=war>Nipis.</foreign>&mdash;Thinness
<item><foreign lang=war>Nosuos.</foreign>&mdash;To rub
</list>

<div3>
<head>O</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Ogát.</foreign>&mdash;Vein, nerve
<item><foreign lang=war>Olo.</foreign>&mdash;Head
<item><foreign lang=war>Oo.</foreign>&mdash;Yes
<item><foreign lang=war>Opa.</foreign>&mdash;Payment
<item><foreign lang=war>Otag.</foreign>&mdash;Debt
<item><foreign lang=war>Owák.</foreign>&mdash;Raven
<item><foreign lang=war>Owáy.</foreign>&mdash;Vine
</list>

<div3>
<head>P</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Pakpak.</foreign>&mdash;Applause with palms
<item><foreign lang=war>Pait.</foreign>&mdash;Bitterness
<item><foreign lang=war>Palad.</foreign>&mdash;Palm of the hand
<item><foreign lang=war>Patay.</foreign>&mdash;Kill
<item><foreign lang=war>Pati.</foreign>&mdash;Also, with
<item><foreign lang=war>Pato&gtilde;.</foreign>&mdash;To place over
<item><foreign lang=war>Payo&gtilde;.</foreign>&mdash;Umbrella
<item><foreign lang=war>Paypay.</foreign>&mdash;Fan
<item><foreign lang=war>Pili.</foreign>&mdash;A tree so called
<item><foreign lang=war>Pili.</foreign>&mdash;To select
<item><foreign lang=war>Pingan.</foreign>&mdash;Plate
<item><foreign lang=war>Pitó.</foreign>&mdash;Seven
<item><foreign lang=war>Pokpok.</foreign>&mdash;To beat
<item><foreign lang=war>Pola.</foreign>&mdash;Red
<item><foreign lang=war>Posod.</foreign>&mdash;Navel
</list>

<div3>
<head>S</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Sa.</foreign>&mdash;To, at, from, on, etc.
<item><foreign lang=war>Sabaw.</foreign>&mdash;Broth
<item><foreign lang=war>Sakay.</foreign>&mdash;To embark
<item><foreign lang=war>Sakit.</foreign>&mdash;Sickness
<item><foreign lang=war>Sagi&gtilde;.</foreign>&mdash;Banana
<item><foreign lang=war>Saló.</foreign>&mdash;Receive
<item><foreign lang=war>Saway.</foreign>&mdash;To correct
<item><foreign lang=war>Sawsaw.</foreign>&mdash;To wash
<item><foreign lang=war>Siko.</foreign>&mdash;Elbow
<item><foreign lang=war>Si&gtilde;ba.</foreign>&mdash;To adore
<item><foreign lang=war>Sili.</foreign>&mdash;Pepper
<item><foreign lang=war>Siyá.</foreign>&mdash;He, she
<item><foreign lang=war>Siyam.</foreign>&mdash;Nine
<item><foreign lang=war>Soka.</foreign>&mdash;To vomit
<item><foreign lang=war>So&gtilde;ay.</foreign>&mdash;Horn
<item><foreign lang=war>Solo&gtilde;.</foreign>&mdash;Forward
<item><foreign lang=war>Sonod.</foreign>&mdash;Follow
<item><foreign lang=war>Sonog.</foreign>&mdash;Fire
</list>

<div3>
<head>T</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Táas.</foreign>&mdash;Height
<item><foreign lang=war>Tabas.</foreign>&mdash;To cut
<item><foreign lang=war>Tadtad.</foreign>&mdash;To prick
<item><foreign lang=war>Ta&gtilde;is.</foreign>&mdash;To weep
<item><foreign lang=war>Tahí.</foreign>&mdash;To sew
<item><foreign lang=war>Timog.</foreign>&mdash;South
<item><foreign lang=war>Tiyán.</foreign>&mdash;Belly
<item><foreign lang=war>Tobâ.</foreign>&mdash;A wine
<item><foreign lang=war>Tobig.</foreign>&mdash;<corr sic=Wreat>Water</corr>
<item><foreign lang=war>Tobó.</foreign>&mdash;Sugar cane
<item><foreign lang=war>Tobò.</foreign>&mdash;Profit, to grow
<item><foreign lang=war>Tohod.</foreign>&mdash;Knee
<item><foreign lang=war>Tohog.</foreign>&mdash;To string
<item><foreign lang=war>Tonóg.</foreign>&mdash;Sound
<item><foreign lang=war>Twad.</foreign>&mdash;To face dawnwards
</list>

<div3>
<head>W</head>

<list>
<item><foreign lang=war>Waló.</foreign>&mdash;Eight
</list>





<pb id=pb130 n=130>
<div2 id=app2.2>
<head>WORDS WITH SOME DIALECTAL DIFFERENCES</head>

<p id=app2.2.1>Differences in the vowels <hi>i</hi>, <hi>o</hi>.


<table id=tb130.1>
<row role=label><cell>BISAYAN         <cell>TAGALOG        <cell>ENGLISH

<row><cell lang=war>Akon            <cell lang=tl>Akin           <cell>my, mine
<row><cell lang=war>Amon            <cell lang=tl>Amin           <cell>our
<row><cell lang=war>Aslom           <cell lang=tl>Asim           <cell>acidity
<row><cell lang=war>Aton            <cell lang=tl>Atin           <cell>our
<row><cell lang=war>Atóp            <cell lang=tl>Atíp           <cell>roof
<row><cell lang=war>Bitóon          <cell lang=tl>Bitúin         <cell>star
<row><cell lang=war>Bokog           <cell lang=tl>Bikig          <cell>fish-bone, bone
<row><cell lang=war>Bogás           <cell lang=tl>Bigas          <cell>rice
<row><cell lang=war>Bog-at          <cell lang=tl>Bigat          <cell>weight
<row><cell lang=war>Bolad           <cell lang=tl>Bilad          <cell>to sun
<row><cell lang=war>Bo&gtilde;ol    <cell lang=tl>Bi&gtilde;í    <cell>deaf
<row><cell lang=war>Kan-on          <cell lang=tl>Kanin          <cell>cooked rice
<row><cell lang=war>Kaon            <cell lang=tl>Kain           <cell>to eat
<row><cell lang=war>Katol           <cell lang=tl>Katí           <cell>to itch, itching
<row><cell lang=war>Dámò            <cell lang=tl>Dami           <cell>amount, much
<row><cell lang=war>Dató&gtilde;    <cell lang=tl>Dati&gtilde;   <cell>to arrive
<row><cell lang=war>Dokót           <cell lang=tl>Dikit          <cell>to adhere, adhered
<row><cell lang=war>Dolóm           <cell lang=tl>Dilim          <cell>dark
<row><cell lang=war>Gorót           <cell lang=tl>Gilit          <cell>slice
<row><cell lang=war>Hábol           <cell lang=tl>Habi           <cell>to weave
<row><cell lang=war>Harok           <cell lang=tl>Halik          <cell>kiss, to kiss
<row><cell lang=war>Hatod           <cell lang=tl>Hatid          <cell>to accompany
<row><cell lang=war>Horám           <cell lang=tl>Hiram          <cell>to borrow
<row><cell lang=war>Iuomon          <cell lang=tl>Inumin         <cell>potable water
<row><cell lang=war>Itom            <cell lang=tl>Itim           <cell>black
<row><cell lang=war>Liog            <cell lang=tl>Liig           <cell>neck
<row><cell lang=war>Pawod           <cell lang=tl>Pawid          <cell>weaved nipa
<row><cell lang=war>Salóg           <cell lang=tl>Sahig          <cell>floor
<row><cell lang=war>Sandig          <cell lang=tl>Sandal         <cell>to lean
<row><cell lang=war>Takóp           <cell lang=tl>Takíp          <cell>cover
<row><cell lang=war>Tanom           <cell lang=tl>Tanim          <cell>plantation
<row><cell lang=war>Taróm           <cell lang=tl>Talim          <cell>edge of a sword, etc.
<row><cell lang=war>Tindok          <cell lang=tl>Tundok         <cell>a kind of banana
<row><cell lang=war>Tindog          <cell lang=tl>Tindig         <cell>to stand
<row><cell lang=war>Tonok           <cell lang=tl>Tiník          <cell>thorn
</table>


<pb id=pb131 n=131><p id=app2.2.2>Differences in <hi>k</hi>, <hi>h</hi>, <hi>l</hi>, <hi>r</hi>, <hi>d</hi>, <hi>t</hi>.


<table id=tb131.1>
<row role=label><cell>BISAYAN     <cell>TAGALOG       <cell>ENGLISH

<row><cell lang=war>Adlaw       <cell lang=tl>Araw          <cell>Sun, day
<row><cell lang=war>Aram        <cell lang=tl>Alam          <cell>Wisdom
<row><cell lang=war>Badò        <cell lang=tl>Barò          <cell>Chemise
<row><cell lang=war>Balay       <cell lang=tl>Bahay         <cell>House
<row><cell lang=war>Balo        <cell lang=tl>Bao           <cell>Widow, widower
<row><cell lang=war>Balon       <cell lang=tl>Baon          <cell>Provision
<row><cell lang=war>Barahibo    <cell lang=tl>Balahibo      <cell>Feather, dawn
<row><cell lang=war>Bari        <cell lang=tl>Bali          <cell>To break
<row><cell lang=war>Bolan       <cell lang=tl>Bwan          <cell>Moon, month
<row><cell lang=war>Kagód       <cell lang=tl>Káyud         <cell>To scrath
<row><cell lang=war>Kalot       <cell lang=tl>Kámot         <cell>To scratch
<row><cell lang=war>Kamó        <cell lang=tl>Kayó          <cell>You
<row><cell lang=war>Koló        <cell lang=tl>Kukú          <cell>Nail
<row><cell lang=war>Dalan       <cell lang=tl>Daan          <cell>Path, road
<row><cell lang=war>Daraga      <cell lang=tl>Dalaga        <cell>Young girl
<row><cell lang=war>Digò        <cell lang=tl>Ligò          <cell>To bath
<row><cell lang=war>Dirì        <cell lang=tl>Hindì         <cell>Not
<row><cell lang=war>Hadì        <cell lang=tl>Harì          <cell>King
<row><cell lang=war>Halabà      <cell lang=tl>Mahaba        <cell>Long
<row><cell lang=war>Halarom     <cell lang=tl>Malalim       <cell>Deep
<row><cell lang=war>Harayò      <cell lang=tl>Malayò        <cell>Far
<row><cell lang=war>Higdà       <cell lang=tl>Higà          <cell>To lay down
<row><cell lang=war>Iróg        <cell lang=tl>Ilo&gtilde;         <cell>Nose
<row><cell lang=war>Lakát       <cell lang=tl>Lakad         <cell>To walk
<row><cell lang=war>Lawod       <cell lang=tl>Láot          <cell>Ocean
<row><cell lang=war>Mahínis     <cell lang=tl>Malinis       <cell>Clean
<row><cell lang=war>Namok       <cell lang=tl>Lamok         <cell>Mosquito
<row><cell lang=war>Napolo      <cell lang=tl>Sampù         <cell>Ten
<row><cell lang=war>Parabol     <cell lang=tl>Palaboy       <cell>Favor, grace
<row><cell lang=war>Pirit       <cell lang=tl>Pilit         <cell>To force
<row><cell lang=war>Poro        <cell lang=tl>Pulò          <cell>Island
<row><cell lang=war>Roa&gtilde; <cell lang=tl>Lwa&gtilde;   <cell>Broad
<row><cell lang=war>Salod       <cell lang=tl>Sahod         <cell>To receive
<row><cell lang=war>Sarapati    <cell lang=tl>Kalapati      <cell>Pigeon
<row><cell lang=war>Sarowal     <cell lang=tl>Salawal       <cell>Pants
<row><cell lang=war>Sira        <cell lang=tl>Sila          <cell>They
<row><cell lang=war>Sira&gtilde;      <cell lang=tl>Silag         <cell>To appear
<row><cell lang=war>Siro&gtilde;      <cell lang=tl>Silo&gtilde;        <cell>Beneath
<row><cell lang=war>Sodlay      <cell lang=tl>Suklay        <cell>Comb
<row><cell lang=war>Sorat       <cell lang=tl>Sulat         <cell>Letter
<row><cell lang=war>Sorok       <cell lang=tl>Sulok         <cell>Corner
<pb id=pb132 n=132><row><cell lang=war>Tali&gtilde;a   <cell lang=tl>Tai&gtilde;a        <cell>Ear
<row><cell lang=war>Taro&gtilde;     <cell lang=tl>Talo&gtilde;        <cell>A plant
<row><cell lang=war>Torò           <cell lang=tl>Tulò          <cell>Drop
<row><cell lang=war>Torog          <cell lang=tl>Tulog         <cell>To sleep
<row><cell lang=war>Toktok         <cell lang=tl>Togtog        <cell>To sound, to play
</table>


<p id=app2.2.3>Differences in the accent, and in the separation of the syllables.


<table id=tb132.1>
<row role=label><cell>BISAYAN         <cell>TAGALOG       <cell>ENGLISH

<row><cell lang=war>Bálik           <cell lang=tl>Balík         <cell>to come back
<row><cell lang=war>Kohà            <cell lang=tl>Kuha          <cell>to take
<row><cell lang=war>Gaód            <cell lang=tl>Gáod          <cell>oar
<row><cell lang=war>Hipág           <cell lang=tl>Hípag         <cell>sister-in-law
<row><cell lang=war>Laón            <cell lang=tl>Láon          <cell>old, ancient
<row><cell lang=war>Sábay           <cell lang=tl>Sabáy         <cell>simultaneous
<row><cell lang=war>Tawá            <cell lang=tl>Táwa          <cell>laugh
<row><cell lang=war>Kab-it          <cell lang=tl>Kabít         <cell>connected
<row><cell lang=war>Kam-aw          <cell lang=tl>Kamao         <cell>a dish
<row><cell lang=war>Kan-on          <cell lang=tl>Kanin         <cell>cooked rice
<row><cell lang=war>Koan            <cell lang=tl>Kwán          <cell>so and so
<row><cell lang=war>Gab-i           <cell lang=tl>Gabí          <cell>evening, night
<row><cell lang=war>Sab-a           <cell lang=tl>Sabá          <cell>a kind of banana
<row><cell lang=war>Sab-it          <cell lang=tl>Sabit         <cell>to hook
<row><cell lang=war>Tan-aw          <cell lang=tl>Tanaw         <cell>to look
<row><cell lang=war>Tig-a           <cell lang=tl>Tigás         <cell>hardness
<row><cell lang=war>Tul-id          <cell lang=tl>Twid          <cell>straight
</table>

<p id=app2.2.4>Transformation from <hi>a</hi> to <hi>o</hi>, and viceversa.

<table id=tb132.2>
<row><cell lang=war>Alapoop       <cell lang=tl>Alapaap        <cell>cloud, fog
<row><cell lang=war>Kamót         <cell lang=tl>Kamay          <cell>hand
<row><cell lang=war>Doha          <cell lang=tl>Dalawá         <cell>two
<row><cell lang=war>Habobò        <cell lang=tl>Mababà         <cell>low
<row><cell lang=war>Sokól         <cell lang=tl>Sukat          <cell>measure
<row><cell lang=war>Toló          <cell lang=tl>Tatlo          <cell>three
<row><cell lang=war>Onóm          <cell lang=tl>Anim           <cell>six
<row><cell lang=war>Opat          <cell lang=tl>Apat           <cell>four
<row><cell lang=war>Otok          <cell lang=tl>Utak           <cell>brain
</table>






<pb id=pb133 n=133>
<div1 id=errata type=Errata>
<head>ERRATA</head>

<p rend=transcriberNote>The errata have been applied to the text, except in a few cases where the misspelling could not be located.

<table id=tb133.1 rend=small>
<row role=label><cell>PAGE <cell>LINE          <cell>                          <cell>
<row><cell>1    <cell>7  <corr>(note)</corr>   <cell>city.          <cell><seg>for</seg> city,                  <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>2    <cell>1  (note)     <cell>this method               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> the method   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>8    <cell>15            <cell>han                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> han, canán   <!-- UNCLEAR -->
<row><cell>13   <cell>3  (note)     <cell>SUPRA                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> INFRA        <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>15   <cell>23            <cell>wich                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> with         <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>18   <cell>10            <cell>as.                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> as           <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>18   <cell>27            <cell>MGA                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> MAG          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>19   <cell>11            <cell>mag-áarot                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> mag-aárot    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>19   <cell>19            <cell>(person bold) in reading  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> (person bold in reading) <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>23   <cell>11            <cell>whe                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> we           <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>23   <cell>31            <cell>(lier)                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> (liar)       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>24   <cell>5             <cell>pauá, capauá              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> pauà, capauà <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>25   <cell>1             <cell>simyly                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> simply       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>25   <cell>21            <cell>take                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> taking       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>26   <cell>29            <cell>expresses,                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> expresses    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>30   <cell>1 (note)      <cell>names                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> name         <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>31   <cell>6             <cell>tastes                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> tests        <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>32   <cell>31            <cell>adje-                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> adjec-       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>34   <cell>last line     <cell>excesive                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> excessive    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>35   <cell>1             <cell>before primitive          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> before the primitive <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>35   <cell>17            <cell>paintful                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> painful      <!-- OK (2x) -->
<row><cell>36   <cell>29            <cell>insted                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> instead      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>37   <cell>28            <cell>that and                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> and that     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>38   <cell>14            <cell>te                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> the          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>38   <cell>16, 21        <cell>cabataán-&lpar;reunion    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> cabatáan-(reunion) <!-- UNCLEAR -->
<row><cell>38   <cell>19            <cell>ty make                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> to make      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>39   <cell>4             <cell>despective                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> depreciative <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>39   <cell>7             <cell>tru                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> thru         <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>39   <cell>23            <cell>voriations                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> variations   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>39   <cell>3 (notes)     <cell>parvity                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> littleness   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>39   <cell>3, 4 (notes)  <cell>onomatopic                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> onomatopoetic <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>40   <cell>4, 12         <cell>FEMENINE                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> FEMININE     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>40   <cell>23            <cell>or of                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> or by        <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>41   <cell>11            <cell>inflexion                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> inflection   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>41   <cell>16            <cell>samet leters              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> same letters <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>42   <cell>17            <cell>zingiber                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> ginger       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>42   <cell>29            <cell>moderstand                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> understand   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>42   <cell>30            <cell>passanger                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> passenger    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>44   <cell>20            <cell>follwed                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> followed     <!-- OK -->
<pb id=pb134 n=134>
<row><cell>46  <cell> 9             <cell>cabataán                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> cabatáan     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>40  <cell>15             <cell>guipác, guipác            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> guipic, guipác <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>46  <cell>29             <cell>(saliba)                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> (saliva)     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>46  <cell>30             <cell>(resine)                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> (resin)      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>46  <cell>30             <cell>(unarticulate voice)      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> (inarticulate voice) <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>47  <cell>10             <cell>Quitá, camí (we)          <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> Quita, camí (3) (we) <!-- NOTE MARKER OK -->
<row><cell>49  <cell> 1             <cell>further from the speaker than from the listener <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> far from both<corr sic=","></corr> the speaker and the listener    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>50  <cell>20             <cell>the form hadton           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> the forms hadto and haton. <!-- OK; Added italics -->
<row><cell>52  <cell> 1             <cell>REEALATIVE                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> RELATIVE     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>52  <cell>11             <cell>inflexion                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> inflection   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>52  <cell>16, 19, 24     <cell>litterally                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>52  <cell>16             <cell>verted                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> expressed    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>52  <cell>28             <cell>flwer&rpar;               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> flower&rpar; <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>52  <cell> 3 (Notes)     <cell>preceds the adjetive      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> precedes the adjective <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>52  <cell> 4 (Notes)     <cell>permisible                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> permissible  <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>58  <cell>15             <cell>litterally                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>59  <cell> 1, 4          <cell>litterally                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>59  <cell>21             <cell>I have written &lpar;I wrote <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> (I have written, I wrote) <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>60  <cell>16, 17         <cell>subjuntive                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> subjunctive  <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>60  <cell>26             <cell>hade                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> had          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>62  <cell>16             <cell>Examp                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> Example      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>62  <cell>18             <cell>the said consonant, being <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> the said consonant being <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>62  <cell> 1 (Note)      <cell>Potencial                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> Potential    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>63  <cell> 9             <cell>FNTURE                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> FUTURE       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>63  <cell>23, 24         <cell>dermined                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> determined   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>64  <cell>21             <cell>the some                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> the same     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>64  <cell> 1 (note)      <cell>snbjunctive               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> subjunctive  <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>65  <cell>28             <cell>if it an M                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> if it is an M <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>67  <cell> 1             <cell>Ehe                       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> The          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>67  <cell> 5             <cell>excep                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> except       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>68  <cell>18             <cell>ef                        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> of           <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>68  <cell>21             <cell>an HAND                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> and HAN      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>68  <cell>23             <cell>the combination           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> combination  <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>68  <cell>30             <cell>(drinked)                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> (drunk)      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>69  <cell>21, 23, 26     <cell>litt.                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> lit.         <!-- OK 3x -->
<row><cell>70  <cell> 5             <cell>INDICATIVE                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> INFINITIVE   <!-- OK, adj. case -->
<row><cell>76  <cell>10             <cell>INDICATIVE                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> INFINITIVE   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>77  <cell>17             <cell>and interfix              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> and the interfix <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>78  <cell> 1, 2          <cell>litterally                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>78  <cell>26             <cell>PROGRESSIVE INDIRECT PASSIVE <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> PASSIVE PROGRESSIVE INSTRUMENTAL <!-- OK adj. case -->
<row><cell>80  <cell>32             <cell>us you                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> us, you      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>80  <cell>32             <cell>than not write            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> them not write   <!-- OK -->
<pb id=pb135 n=135>
<row><cell> 81  <cell> 4            <cell>in primitive forms       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> among the primitive forms <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 81  <cell> 5            <cell>and in                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> and among the <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 82  <cell>17            <cell>and other                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> and the other <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 82  <cell>23            <cell>wher                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> where         <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 83  <cell>13            <cell>there are                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> they are      <!-- OK; fixed case -->
<row><cell> 83  <cell>18            <cell>came                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> come          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 83  <cell>29            <cell>take                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> takes         <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 84  <cell>24            <cell>postponed to them        <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> follow them   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 84  <cell>25            <cell>ALVERBIAL FORM           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> ADVERBIAL FORM <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 86  <cell> 2            <cell>cach                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> each          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 86  <cell> 3            <cell>befere                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> before        <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 86  <cell>26            <cell>ordinaryly               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> ordinaryly    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 87  <cell> 3            <cell>preseut                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> present       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 87  <cell>14            <cell>with present             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> with the present <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 87  <cell>24            <cell>contigent                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> contingent    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 88  <cell>24            <cell>the rains                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> the rain      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 88  <cell>24            <cell>than; litterally         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> them; literally <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 89  <cell> 3            <cell>it as <corr sic=follws>follows</corr> <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> as follows <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 89  <cell>18            <cell>os the form              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> of the form   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 89  <cell>23            <cell>litterally               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 90  <cell> 7            <cell>CONJNGATIONAL ROOT       <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> CONJUGATIONAL ROOT <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 91  <cell>27            <cell>leave of abandonment     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> leave or abandonment <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 91  <cell>29            <cell>litterally               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 92  <cell> 2            <cell>the the interfix         <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> the interfix  <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 92  <cell>20            <cell>proceding                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> preceding     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 92  <cell>25            <cell>recipocrate              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> reciprocate   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 93  <cell> 5            <cell>hatter                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> hotter        <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 96  <cell>26            <cell>tune                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> tone          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell> 98  <cell>19            <cell>whith                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> with          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>100  <cell>13, 27        <cell>litterally               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally     <!-- OK 2x -->
<row><cell>100  <cell>23            <cell>demonstratives           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> <corr sic=demonstratIve>demonstrative</corr> <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>102  <cell>29            <cell>thould                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> should        <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>102  <cell>31            <cell>litterally               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>102  <cell> 3 (note)     <cell>litterally               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>103  <cell>21            <cell>he sad                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> he said       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>103  <cell>27            <cell>litterally               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> literally     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>103  <cell>32            <cell>proceeded                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> preceded      <!-- FIXED preceeded -->
<row><cell>104  <cell> 6            <cell>used                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> use           <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>104  <cell>20            <cell>Jonh                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> John          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>105  <cell>21, 22        <cell>corresponding            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> corresponding word <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>106  <cell> 4            <cell>adonment                 <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> adornment     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>106  <cell>28            <cell>meet                     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> meat          <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>107  <cell>12            <cell>mousefully               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> unusefully    <!-- DUBIOUS -->
<row><cell>107  <cell>15            <cell>Deefcto                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> Defecto       <!-- OK -->
<pb id=pb136 n=136>
<row><cell>107  <cell>16            <cell>unfurtunate              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> unfortunate   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>107  <cell>20            <cell>drowing                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> drawing       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>108  <cell>21            <cell>bulter                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> butter        <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>109  <cell>15            <cell>to lost                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> to lose       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>109  <cell>23            <cell>bit                      <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> bet           <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>109  <cell>27            <cell>laste                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> taste         <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>110  <cell>26            <cell>maintanence              <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> maintenance   <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>111  <cell>15            <cell>deer, for fat            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> dear, fat     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>111  <cell>28            <cell>chaw-chaw                <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> chow-chow     <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>111  <cell> 2 (note)     <cell>object                   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> objects       <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>118  <cell>34            <cell>hastned                  <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> hastened      <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>122  <cell>13            <cell>some other               <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> same order    <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>123  <cell>23            <cell>verses of six verses     <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> verses of six syllables, verses <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>124  <cell>25            <cell>BISAYAN SONG             <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> BISAYAN SONGS <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>124  <cell>26            <cell>following song           <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> following songs. <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>125  <cell>27            <cell>Posed                    <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> posed         <!-- NOT FOUND -->
<row><cell>128  <cell>14            <cell>aglit ... aswa&gtilde;   <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> A&gtilde;lit, aswa&gtilde; <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>128  <cell>19, 20<corr sic=",,">,</corr> 21 <cell>Baga, Bága, Bagá <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> Baga, Bagá, Baga <!-- OK -->
<row><cell>128  <cell> 3 (note)     <cell>there vowells            <cell><seg copyOf=for>,,</seg> three vowels  <!-- OK -->
</table>

</div1>


<divGen type=Colophon>


</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>